        REPUBLIC OF KENYA




         LEARNING GUIDE




                FOR




PERIOPERATIVE THEATRE TECHNOLOGY

              LEVEL 6




            TVET CDACC
         P.O. BOX 15745-00100
              NAIROBI
First published 2020
©Copyright TVET CDACC

All rights reserved. No part of this learning guide may be reproduced, distributed, or transmitted
in any form or by any means, including photocopying, recording, or other electronic or mechanical
methods without the prior written permission of the TVET CDACC, except in the case of brief
quotations embodied in critical reviews and certain other non-commercial uses permitted by
copyright law. For permission requests, write to the Council Secretary/CEO, at the address below:



Council Secretary/CEO
TVET Curriculum Development, Assessment and Certification Council
P.O. Box 15745–00100
Nairobi, Kenya
Email: info@tvetcdacc.go.ke
Website: www.tvetcdacc.go.ke
                                           FOREWORD
The provision of quality education and training is fundamental to the Government’s overall
strategy for social economic development. Quality education and training will contribute to
achievement of Kenya’s development blue print and sustainable development goals. Reforms in
education are necessary to align the sector to the provisions of the Constitution of Kenya 2010.
This triggered the formulation of the Policy Framework on “Reforming Education and Training in
Kenya” (Sessional Paper No. 1 of 2019). A key provision of this policy is the radical change in the
design, development and delivery of Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET)
which is the key to unlocking the country’s potential for industrialization. This policy requires that
training in TVET be Competency Based, Curriculum development be industry led, certification be
based on demonstration of competence and that mode of delivery allows for multiple entry and
exit in TVET programs.
  The State Department for Vocational and Technical Training (VTT) has a responsibility of
  facilitating the process of inculcating knowledge, skills and attitudes necessary for catapulting
  the nation to a globally competitive country, hence the paradigm shift to embrace Competency
  Based Education and Training (CBET) to address the mismatch between skills acquired through
  training and skills needed by industry as well as increase the global competitiveness of Kenyan
  labor force. The Technical and Vocational Education and Training Act No. 29 of 2013 and the
  Sessional Paper No. 1 of 2019 on Reforming Education and Training in Kenya, emphasizes the
  need to reform curriculum development, assessment and certification to respond to the unique
  needs of the industry.

  This learning guide has been developed to support the implementation of CBET curriculum in
  Perioperative theatre technology and is intended to guide the trainee through the learning
  process. It is my conviction that this learning guide will play a critical role towards supporting
  the development of competent human resource for Health sector’s growth and sustainable
  development.




PRINCIPAL SECRETARY, VOCATIONAL AND TECHNICAL TRAINING
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION
                                                       PREFACE

Kenya Vision 2030 is anticipated to transform the country into a newly industrializing, “middle-income
country providing a high-quality life to all its citizens by the year 2030”. The Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) number four that focuses on inclusive and equitable quality education and promotion of
lifelong learning for all, further affirm that education and training is an important driver to economic
development for any country. Kenya intends to create a globally competitive and adaptive human
resource base to meet the requirements of a rapidly industrializing economy.

TVET CDACC has a responsibility of facilitating the process of inculcating knowledge, skills and
attitudes necessary for catapulting the nation to a globally competitive country, hence the paradigm shift
to embrace Competency Based Education and Training (CBET) to address the mismatch between skills
acquired through training and skills needed by industry as well as increase the global competitiveness of
Kenyan labor force. The Technical and Vocational Education and Training Act No. 29 of 2013 and the
Sessional Paper No. 1 of 2019 on Reforming Education and Training in Kenya, emphasizes the need to
reform curriculum development, assessment and certification to respond to the unique needs of the
industry.

To effectively implement CBET curriculum in Perioperative Theatre Technology Level 6, this learning
guide has been designed and organized with clear interactive learning activities for each learning outcome
of every unit of learning. The guide further provides information sheet, self-assessment items, tools,
equipment, supplies, and materials necessary for the particular learning outcome. This is aimed at
imparting the relevant knowledge, requisite skills and the right attitude for work.




I am grateful to the trainers involved in the development of this learning guide.




CHAIRMAN,

TVET Curriculum Development, Assessment and Certification Council
                                   ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This learning guide has been designed and developed to support the implementation of
Competency Based Education and Training (CBET) curricula in Kenya. The learning guide is
intended to support learning by providing practical and theoretical learning activities, simplified
content and self-assessment items to guide the trainee in the learning process.

I recognize with appreciation the critical role of trainers in developing this learning guide and
ensuring its alignment with National Occupational Standards (OS) and CBET curriculum. I am
convinced that this learning guide will support trainees’ acquisition of knowledge, skills and right
attitude needed for work in the Biotechnology sector.




COUNCIL SECRETARY/CEO
TVET Curriculum Development, Assessment and Certification Council
                      ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

 CBET            Competency Based Education and Training

 CBPR            Community-based participatory research

 CDACC:   Curriculum Development, Assessment and Certification Council

 CDC      Disease Control and Prevention

 CEO      Chief Executive Officer

 CHAs            Community health assessments

 CRD      Crude Death Rate

 EHR      Electronic health record

 HNA             Health Needs Assessment

 JSNA            Joint Strategic Needs Assessment

 KAP      Knowledge, Attitudes and Practices

 OS       Occupational Standards

 PFACs           patient and family advisory councils

SDGs      Sustainable Development Goals

 TVET:    Technical and Vocational Education and Training

 WHO             World Health Organization
A         : Control version

BC: Basic Competency

CBET             Competency Based Education and Training

CDACC     : Curriculum Development, Assessment and Certification Council

CEO       Chief Executive Officer

CM        : Common Competencies

CR        : Core Competency

CSSD             Central Sterile Supply Department

ECG       Electrocardiogram

ICT       : Information Communication Technology

IP        Inpatient Service (IP)

IPS       Isolated Power Supply

MoH              Ministry of Health

MRD              Medical Record Department

MRI              Magnetic Resonance Imaging

NEMA             : National Environmental Management Authority

OPD       Outpatient department (OPD)

OR        Operating Room

OS        : Occupational Standards

OS        Occupational Standards
OSHA           : Occupation Safety and Health Act

OSHS           : Occupation Safety and Health Standards

OT      Operation Theatre Complex

PPE            : Personal Protective Equipment

PPEs           Personal protective equipmentss

PT      : Operation Theatre

PTT     : Operation Theatre Technology

SDGs           Sustainable Development Goals

SOP     : Standard Operating Procedures

SSAC           : Sector Skills Advisory Committee

TT      : Theatre Technology

TVET           : Technical and Vocational Education and Training

TVET:   Technical and Vocational Education and Training

UPS            Un-interruptible Power Supply

VCT     Voluntary Counselling and Testing

VDRL           Venereal Disease Research Laboratory

WHO            World Health Organization

WHO            : World Health Organization
TABLE OF CONTENT




LIST OF FIGURES AND TABLES

  LIST OF TABLES

Table 1: Basic Units of Learning     8

Table 2: Common Units of Learning 9

Table 3: Core Units of Learning.     9

Table 4: Human body cavities and membranes          Error! Bookmark not defined.

  Table 5: Hormones produced by the endocrine
  system…………………………………………73

  LIST OF FIGURES

  Figure 1: Organizational chart of Ministry of Health structure   4
  Figure 2: Generic organogram of district hospitals in Kenya. *Medical officers here refer to
  physicians while clinical officers are “non-physician” clinicians as described in 16   5

  Figure 3: Organization of health services in Kenya under a devolved system.      15

  Figure 4: Medical Theatre layout 18

  Figure 5: Theatre layout      20

Figure 1: Feedback Loop.        17

Figure 2: Sodium and Potassium Pump          23

Figure 3: Skeletal System       40

  Figure 4: The cranium…………………………………………………………………………42

  Figure 5: Types of
  bones…………………………………………………………………………45

  Figure 6: Synovial
  joint………………………………………………………………………….51

  Figure 7: Types of synovial
  joints……………………………………………………………….53

  Figure 9: The human
  heart……………………………………………………………………….58

  Figure 10: Parallel distribution
  organs…………………………………………………………...59

  Figure 11: The lymphatic
  system………………………………………………………………...60

  Figure 12: The white blood
  cells……………………………………………………………….,63
Figure 13:
Platelets………………………………………………………………………………64

Figure 14: Lymph
nodes…………………………………………………………………………67

Figure 15: Nervous
system………………………………………………………………………76

Figure
16:Neuron………………………………………………………………………………76

Figure 17:Components of a reflex
arc………………………………………………………….77

Figure 18: The
brain……………………………………………………………………………..79

Figure 19: Autonomic Nervous
system………………………………………………………….80

Figure 20: The digestive
system…………………………………………………………………83

Figure 21: The
stomach………………………………………………………………………….86

Figure 22: The large
intestine……………………………………………………………………87

Figure 23: The rectum and anal
canal……………………………………………………………88

Figure 24: The urinary
system…………………………………………………………………..91
Figure 25: The
kidney……………………………………………………………………………91

Figure 26: Urine
Formation…………………………………………………………………….93

Figure 27: Glomerular
Filtration……………………………………………………………….93

Figure 28: Respiratory System…………………………………………………………….96

Figure 29: The
alveoli…………………………………………………………………………..96

Figure 30: The eye……………………………………………………………………………100

Figure 32: The ear……………………………………………………..…………………..103

Figure 33: The testis…………………………………………………….……………………107

Figure 34: Male reproductive organ………………………………………………………….108
Background Information
This learning guide will enable the trainee to acquire competencies to undertake various processes
in Biotechnology. It provides practical and theoretical learning activities, simplified content,
illustrations and self-assessment items to guide the trainee in the learning process. It also provides
links and references for further reading.
 Layout of the Trainee Guide
 Performance standards: These are obtained from the performance criteria statements in the
 related unit of competency of the Occupational Standards (OS)

 Information Sheet: This section covers information relating to the specific learning outcome.

This information should include but not limited to meaning of terms, methods, processes/
procedures/ guidelines, Illustrations (photographs, pictures, videos, charts, plans, digital content
links, simulations links) and case studies. This section also provides additional information sources
relevant to the learning outcome e.g. books, web links

Learning activities: This section covers practical activities related to the Performance Criteria
statements, Knowledge in relation to Performance Criteria as given under content in the curriculum
Special instructions related to learning activities

  Self-Assessment: This section must be related to the Performance Criteria, Required Knowledge
  and Skills in the Occupational Standards. This section requires the trainee to evaluate their
  acquisition of skills, knowledge and attitude in relation to the learning outcome. A variety of
  assessment items such as written and practical tests which emphasizes on the application of
  knowledge, skills and attitude is recommended. The self-assessment items should be valid,
  relevant and comprehensive to the level of qualification in the learning outcome.

Tools, equipment, materials and supplies: This section should provide for the requirements of
the learning outcome in terms of tools, equipment, supplies and materials. The section should be
adequate, relevant and comprehensive for the learning outcome.

References: Information sources should be quoted and presented as required in the APA format

The units of learning covered in this learning guide are as presented in the table below:
 Table 1: BASIC UNITS OF COMPETENCY
UNIT OF COMPETENCE         UNIT OF COMPETENCE TITLE
CODE
HE/OS/TT/BC/01/6/A         Demonstrate communication skills
  HE/OS/TT/BC/02/6/A       Demonstrate numeracy skills
  HE/OS/TT/BC/03/6/A       Demonstrate digital literacy
  HE/OS/TT/BC/04/6/A       Demonstrate entrepreneurial skills
  HE/OS/TT/BC/05/6/A       Demonstrate employability skills
  HE/OS/TT/BC/06/6/A       Demonstrate environmental literacy

Table 2: COMMON UNITS OF COMPETENCY
UNIT OF COMPETENCE        UNIT OF COMPETENCE TITLE
CODE
  HE/OS/TT/CC/01/6/A      Demonstrate The Knowledge Of Human Anatomy And
                          Physiology
  HE/OS/TT/CC/02/6/A        Apply Basic Hospital Procedures
  HE/OS/TT/CC/03/6/A        Demonstrate The Knowledge Of Common Diseases
  HE/OS/TT/CC/04/6/A        Provide First Aid Services
  HE/OS/TT/CC/05/6/A        Apply Medical-Legal Ethics
  HE/OS/TT/CC/06/6/A        Provide Health Education And Promotion Services
  HE/OS/TT/CC/07/6/A        Provide Psychosocial Health Support



Table 3: CORE UNITS OF COMPETENCY
 UNIT OF COMPETENCE        UNIT OF COMPETENCE TITLE
 CODE
 HE/OS/TT/CR/01/6/A         Provide Operation Theatre Safety Precautions
  HE/OS/TT/CR/02/6/A        Prevent Nosocomial Infections
  HE/OS/TT/CR/03/6/A        Maintain Operation Theatre Instruments and Apparatus
  HE/OS/TT/CR/04/6/A        Provide Operation Theatre Technical Services
  HE/OS/TT/CR/05/6/A        Execute Operation Theatre Administrative Services
  HE/OS/TT/CR/06/6/A        Participate in Operation Theatre Clinical Services
  HE/OS/TT/CR/07/6/A        Manage Operation Theatre Clinical Services
                                      CHAPTER ONE

                       HUMAN ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

Unit of learning code: HE/OS/TT/CC/01/6/A

Related Unit of Competency in Occupational Standard: Demonstrate Knowledge of Human
Anatomy and Physiology

Introduction to the unit of learning

This unit specifies the competencies required to demonstrate the knowledge of human anatomy
and physiology. It involves demonstrating the knowledge of organization of the human body,
body fluids and their functions, body tissues and membranes and their functions, body cavities,
human skeletal system, major muscles of the body and their functions, body joints, circulatory
system, lymphatic system, endocrine system and its functions, nervous system and its function,
digestive system and its function, urinary system and its function respiratory system and its
function, special senses and their functions, reproductive system and its functions.

Summary of Learning Outcomes
 1. Demonstrate knowledge of organization of the human body
 2. Demonstrate knowledge of body fluids and their functions
 3. Demonstrate knowledge of body tissues and membranes and their functions
 4. Demonstrate knowledge of body cavities
 5. Demonstrate knowledge of the human skeletal system
 6. Demonstrate knowledge of the major muscles of the body and their functions
 7. Demonstrate knowledge of the body joints
 8. Demonstrate knowledge of circulatory system
 9. Demonstrate knowledge of the lymphatic system
 10. Demonstrate knowledge of the endocrine system and its functions
 11. Demonstrate knowledge of the nervous system and its function
 12. Demonstrate knowledge of the digestive system and its function
 13. Demonstrate knowledge of the urinary system and its function
 14. Demonstrate knowledge of the respiratory system and its function
   15. Demonstrate knowledge of the special senses and their functions
   16. Demonstrate knowledge of the reproductive system and its functions




Learning outcome 1; Demonstrate knowledge of organization of the human body
  Introduction to the learning outcome
  This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to identify anatomical
  structures, outline anatomical position, planes and directions, and identify levels of human body
  organization, describe functions of the human body, human cell structure components are
  identified, human cell cycle outlined and homeostasis described.
Performance Standard
1.1 Anatomical structures are identified
1.2 Anatomical position, planes and directions are outlined
1.3 Levels of human body organization are identified
1.4 Functions of the human body are described
1.5 Human cell structure components are identified
1.6 Human cell cycle outlined
1.7 Homeostasis is described

Information Sheet

  Definition of terms

  Anatomical position is the description of any region or part of the body in a specific stance. In
  the anatomical position, the body is upright, directly facing the observer, feet flat and directed
  forward. The upper limbs are at the body’s sides with the palms facing forward.

  Anterior (or ventral) describes the front or direction toward the front of the body. The toes are
  anterior to the foot.

  Posterior (or dorsal) Describes the back or direction toward the back of the body. The popliteus
  is posterior to the patella.
Superior (or cranial) describes a position above or higher than another part of the body proper.
The orbits are superior to the oris.

Inferior (or caudal) describes a position below or lower than another part of the body proper;
near or toward the tail (in humans, the coccyx, or lowest part of the spinal column). The pelvis
is inferior to the abdomen.

Lateral describes the side or direction toward the side of the body. The thumb (pollex) is lateral
to the digits.

Medial describes the middle or direction toward the middle of the body. The hallux is the medial
toe.

Proximal describes a position in a limb that is nearer to the point of attachment or the trunk of
the body. The brachium is proximal to the ante brachium.

Distal describes a position in a limb that is farther from the point of attachment or the trunk of
the body. The crus is distal to the femur.

Superficial describes a position closer to the surface of the body. The skin is superficial to the
bones.

Deep describes a position farther from the surface of the body. The brain is deep to the skull.




Branches of human anatomy

Gross Anatomy - the study of large body structures visible to the naked eye

Regional Anatomy - the study of all structures (blood vessels, nerves, muscles) located in a
particular region of the body

Systemic Anatomy - the gross anatomy of the body studied system by system

Surface Anatomy - the study of internal body structures as they relate to the overlying skin.
Microscopic Anatomy - the study of structures too small to be seen without the aid of a
microscope

Cellular Anatomy - the study of cells of the body

Histology - the study of the microscopic structure of tissues

Developmental Anatomy - the study of changes in an individual from conception to old age

Specialized Branches of Anatomy

• Pathological anatomy - the study structural changes in cells, tissues, and organs caused by
disease

• Radiographic anatomy - the study of internal body structures by means of x-rays and imaging
techniques

• Functional morphology- the study of functional properties of body structures and efficiency of
design.




Organization of the human body
Chemical Level

• At the chemical level atoms combine to form small molecules (CO2 and H2O) and larger
macromolecules.

•Macromolecules of four classes are found in the body

• These macro molecules include carbohydrates (sugars), lipids (fats), proteins and nucleic acids

(DNA, RNA).

Cellular Level

• The smallest units of living tissue.

• Cells and their functional subunits called cellular organelles.




Tissue Level

• Consists of groups of similar cells that have a characteristic function
       • Epithelium

       •Muscle

       • Connective

       • Nervous

  Organ Level

  • A structure composed of at least two tissue types (with four the most common) that performs
  a specific physiological process or function.

  Organ System Level

  • Organs that cooperate with one another to perform a common function

  • For example:- Cardiovascular system.

  Functions of the human body

  Metabolism

The first law of thermodynamics holds that energy can neither be created nor destroyed—it can
only change form. Your basic function as an organism is to consume (ingest) energy and
molecules in the foods you eat, convert some of it into fuel for movement, sustain your body
functions, and build and maintain your body structures. There are two types of reactions that
accomplish this: anabolism and catabolism.

      Anabolism is the process whereby smaller, simpler molecules are combined into larger,
       more complex substances. Your body can assemble, by utilizing energy, the complex
       chemicals it needs by combining small molecules derived from the foods you eat
      Catabolism is the process by which larger more complex substances are broken down into
       smaller simpler molecules. Catabolism releases energy. The complex molecules found in
       foods are broken down so the body can use their parts to assemble the structures and
       substances needed for life.
Responsiveness
Responsiveness is the ability of an organism to adjust to changes in its internal and

external environments. An example of responsiveness to external stimuli could include moving
toward sources of food and water and away from perceived dangers.

Changes in an organism’s internal environment, such as increased body temperature, can cause
the responses of sweating and the dilation of blood vessels in the skin in order to decrease body
temperature.

Movement

Human movement includes not only actions at the joints of the body, but also the motion of
individual organs and even individual cells. As you read these words, red and white blood cells
are moving throughout your body, muscle cells are contracting and relaxing to maintain your
posture and to focus your vision, and glands are secreting chemicals to regulate body functions.
Your body is coordinating the action of entire muscle groups to enable you to move air into and
out of your lungs, to push blood throughout your body, and to propel the food you have eaten
through your digestive tract. Consciously, of course, you contract your skeletal muscles to move
the bones of your skeleton to get from one place to another and to carry out all of the activities
of your daily life.

Development, Growth and Reproduction

Development is all of the changes the body goes through in life. Development includes the
process of differentiation, in which unspecialized cells become specialized in structure and
function to perform certain tasks in the body. Development also includes the processes of growth
and repair, both of which involve cell differentiation.

Growth is the increase in body size. Humans, like all multicellular organisms, grow by
increasing the number of existing cells, increasing the amount of non-cellular material around
cells (such as mineral deposits in bone), and, within very narrow limits, increasing the size of
existing cells.
Reproduction is the formation of a new organism from parent organisms. In humans,
reproduction is carried out by the male and female reproductive systems. Because death will
come to all complex organisms, without reproduction, the line of organisms would end.

The cell




All the tissues and organs of the body originate from a microscopic structure (the fertilized
ovum), which consists of a soft jelly-like material enclosed in a membrane and containing a
vesicle or small spherical body inside which are one or more denser spots. This may be regarded
as a complete cell. All the solid tissues consist largely of cells essentially similar to it in nature
but differing in external form.

Nucleolus, are not essential to the type cell, and in fact In the higher organisms a cell may be
defined as “a nucleated mass of protoplasm of microscopic size.” Its two essentials, therefore,
are: a soft jelly-like material, similar to that found in the ovum, and usually styled cytoplasm,
and a small spherical body imbedded in it, and termed a nucleus. Some of the unicellular

protozoa contain no nuclei but granular particles which, like true nuclei, stain with basic dyes.
The other constituents of the ovum, viz., its limiting membrane and the denser spot contained in
the nucleus, called the many cells exist without them.

A typical animal cell comprises the following cell organelles:
Cell Membrane – a thin semi permeable membrane layer of protein and fats surrounding the
cell. Its primary role is to protect the cell from its surrounding. Also, it controls the entry and
exit of nutrients and other microscopic entities into the cell.

Nuclear Membrane - is a double-membrane structure that surrounds the nucleus. It is also
referred to as the nuclear envelope.

Nucleus - It is an organelle that contains several other sub-organelles such as nucleolus,
nucleosomes and chromatins. It also contains DNA and other genetic materials.

Centrosome - is a small organelle found near to the nucleus which has a thick centre with
radiating tubules. The centrosomes are where microtubules are produced.

Lysosome (Cell Vesicles) - They are round organelles surrounded by a membrane and
comprising digestive enzymes which help in digestion, excretion and in the cell renewal process.

Cytoplasm - a jelly-like material which contains all the cell organelles, enclosed within the cell
membrane. The substance found within the cell nucleus, contained by the nuclear membrane is
called the nucleoplasm.

Golgi apparatus – is a flat, smooth layered, sac-like organelle which is located near the nucleus
and involved in manufacturing, storing, packing and transporting the particles throughout the
cell.

Mitochondrion - they are spherical or rod-shaped organelles with a double membrane. They
are the powerhouse of a cell as they play an important role in releasing energy.

Ribosome - they are small organelles made up of RNA-rich cytoplasmic granules, and they are
the sites of protein synthesis.

Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) - This cellular organelle is composed of a thin, winding network
of membranous sacs originating from the nucleus.

Vacuole – a membrane-bound organelle present inside a cell involved in maintaining shape and
storing water, food, wastes, etc.
Nucleopore - they are tiny holes present in the nuclear membrane which are involved in the
movement of nucleic acids and proteins within the cell.

Cell cycle

The cell cycle is an ordered series of events involving cell growth and cell division that produces
two new daughter cells. Cells on the path to cell division proceed through a series of precisely
timed and carefully regulated stages of growth, DNA replication, and division that produces two
identical (clone) cells.
Fig: The cell cycle

The cell cycle has two major phases: interphase and the mitotic phase. During interphase, the
cell grows and DNA is replicated. During the mitotic phase, the replicated DNA and cytoplasmic
contents are separated, and the cell divides.

Interphase
During interphase, the cell undergoes normal growth processes while also preparing for cell
division. In order for a cell to move from interphase into the mitotic phase, many internal and
external conditions must be met. The three stages of interphase are called G1, S, and G2.

G1 Phase (First Gap)

The first stage of interphase is called the G1 phase (first gap) because, from a microscopic
aspect, little change is visible. However, during the G1 stage, the cell is quite active at the
biochemical level. The cell is accumulating the building blocks of chromosomal DNA and the
associated proteins as well as accumulating sufficient energy reserves to complete the task of
replicating each chromosome in the nucleus.

S Phase (Synthesis of DNA)

Throughout interphase, nuclear DNA remains in a semi-condensed chromatin configuration. In
the S phase, DNA replication can proceed through the mechanisms that result in the formation
of identical pairs of DNA molecules—sister chromatids—that are firmly attached to the
centromeric region. The centrosome is duplicated during the S phase. The two centrosomes will
give rise to the mitotic spindle, the apparatus that orchestrates the movement of chromosomes
during mitosis. At the center of each animal cell, the centrosomes of animal cells are associated
with a pair of rod-like objects, the centrioles, which are at right angles to each other. Centrioles
help organize cell division. Centrioles are not present in the centrosomes of other eukaryotic
species, such as plants and most fungi.

G2 Phase (Second Gap)

In the G2 phase, the cell replenishes its energy stores and synthesizes proteins necessary for
chromosome manipulation. Some cell organelles are duplicated, and the cytoskeleton is
dismantled to provide resources for the mitotic phase. There may be additional cell growth
during G2. The final preparations for the mitotic phase must be completed before the cell is able
to enter the first stage of mitosis.

The Mitotic Phase
The mitotic phase is a multistep processes during which the duplicated chromosomes are
aligned, separated, and move into two new, identical daughter cells. The first portion of the
mitotic phase is called karyokinesis, or nuclear division. The second portion of the mitotic phase,
called cytokinesis, is the physical separation of the cytoplasmic components into the two
daughter cells.

Karyokinesis (Mitosis)

Karyokinesis, also known as mitosis, is divided into a series of phases—prophase,
prometaphase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase—that result in the division of the cell
nucleus (Figure 2). Karyokinesis is also called mitosis.

During prophase, the “first phase,” the nuclear envelope starts to dissociate into small vesicles,
and the membranous organelles (such as the Golgi complex or Golgi apparatus, and endoplasmic
reticulum), fragment and disperse toward the periphery of the cell. The nucleolus disappears
(disperses). The centrosomes begin to move to opposite poles of the cell. Microtubules that will
form the mitotic spindle extend between the centrosomes, pushing them farther apart as the
microtubule fibers lengthen. The sister chromatids begin to coil more tightly with the aid of
condensin proteins and become visible under a light microscope.

During prometaphase, the “first change phase,” many processes that were begun in prophase
continue to advance. The remnants of the nuclear envelope fragment. The mitotic spindle
continues to develop as more microtubules assemble and stretch across the length of the former
nuclear area. Chromosomes become more condensed and discrete. Each sister chromatid
develops a protein structure called a kinetochore in the centromeric region. The proteins of the
kinetochore attract and bind mitotic spindle microtubules. As the spindle microtubules extend
from the centrosomes, some of these microtubules come into contact with and firmly bind to the
kinetochores. Once a mitotic fiber attaches to a chromosome, the chromosome will be oriented
until the kinetochores of sister chromatids face the opposite poles. Eventually, all the sister
chromatids will be attached via their kinetochores to microtubules from opposing poles. Spindle
microtubules that do not engage the chromosomes are called polar microtubules. These
microtubules overlap each other midway between the two poles and contribute to cell
elongation. Astral microtubules are located near the poles, aid in spindle orientation, and are
required for the regulation of mitosis.
During metaphase, the “change phase,” all the chromosomes are aligned in a plane called the
metaphase plate, or the equatorial plane, midway between the two poles of the cell. The sister
chromatids are still tightly attached to each other by cohesin proteins. At this time, the
chromosomes are maximally condensed.

During anaphase, the “upward phase,” the cohesin proteins degrade, and the sister chromatids
separate at the centromere. Each chromatid, now called a chromosome, is pulled rapidly toward
the centrosome to which its microtubule is attached. The cell becomes visibly elongated (oval
shaped) as the polar microtubules slide against each other at the metaphase plate where they
overlap.

During telophase, the “distance phase,” the chromosomes reach the opposite poles and begin to
decondense (unravel), relaxing into a chromatin configuration. The mitotic spindles are
depolymerized into tubulin monomers that will be used to assemble cytoskeletal components
for each daughter cell. Nuclear envelopes form around the chromosomes, and nucleosomes
appear within the nuclear area.




Homeostasis

Introduction to Homeostasis

Homeostasis refers to the body’s ability to maintain a stable internal environment (regulating
hormones, body temp., water balance, etc.). Maintaining homeostasis requires that the body
continuously monitors its internal conditions. From body temperature to blood pressure to levels
of certain nutrients, each physiological condition has a particular set point. A set point is the
physiological value around which the normal range fluctuates. A normal range is the restricted
set of values that is optimally healthful and stable. For example, the set point for normal human
body temperature is approximately 37°C (98.6°F) Physiological parameters, such as body
temperature and blood pressure, tend to fluctuate within a normal range a few degrees above
and below that point. Control centers in the brain play roles in regulating physiological
parameters and keeping them within the normal range. As the body works to maintain
homeostasis, any significant deviation from the normal range will be resisted and homeostasis
restored through a process called a feedback loop.

A feedback loop has three basic components (Figure 1.10a). A sensor, also known as a receptor,
is a component of a feedback system that monitors a physiological value. It is responsible for
detecting a change in the environment. This value is reported to the control center. The control
center is the component in a feedback system that compares the value to the normal range. If
the value deviates too much from the set point, then the control center activates an effector. An
effector is the component in a feedback system that causes a change to reverse the situation and
return the value to the normal range. Effectors are muscles and glands.




Two Types of Feedback Loops: Negative and Positive

Negative feedback is a mechanism in which the effect of the response to the stimulus is to shut
off the original stimulus or reduce its intensity. Negative feedback loops are the body’s most
common mechanisms used to maintain homeostasis.

The maintenance of homeostasis by negative feedback goes on throughout the body at all times,
and an understanding of negative feedback is thus fundamental to an understanding of human
physiology.




Figure 1: Feedback loop
In order to set the system in motion, a stimulus change an internal environment beyond its
normal range (that is, beyond homeostasis). This stimulus is detected by a specific receptor. For
example, in the control of blood glucose, specific endocrine cells in the pancreas detect excess
glucose (the stimulus) in the bloodstream. These pancreatic beta cells respond to the increased
level of blood glucose by releasing the hormone insulin into the bloodstream. The insulin signals
skeletal muscle fibers, fat cells (adipocytes), and liver cells to take up the excess glucose,
removing it from the bloodstream. As glucose concentration in the bloodstream drops, the
decrease in concentration—the actual negative feedback—is detected by pancreatic alpha cells,
and insulin release stops. This prevents blood sugar levels from continuing to drop below the
normal range.

Humans have a similar temperature regulation feedback system that works by promoting either
heat loss or heat gain. When the brain’s temperature regulation center receives data from the
sensors indicating that the body’s temperature exceeds its normal range, it stimulates a cluster
of brain cells referred to as the “heat-loss center.” This stimulation has three major effects:

Blood vessels in the skin begin to dilate allowing more blood from the body core to flow to the
surface of the skin allowing the heat to radiate into the environment.

As blood flow to the skin increases, sweat glands are activated to increase their output. As the
sweat evaporates from the skin surface into the surrounding air, it takes heat with it.

The depth of respiration increases, and a person may breathe through an open mouth instead of
through the nasal passageways. This further increases heat loss from the lungs.

In contrast, activation of the brain’s heat-gain center by exposure to cold reduces blood flow to
the skin, and blood returning from the limbs is diverted into a network of deep veins. This
arrangement traps heat closer to the body core and restricts heat loss. If heat loss is severe, the
brain triggers an increase in random signals to skeletal muscles, causing them to contract and
producing shivering. The muscle contractions of shivering release heat while using up ATP. The
brain triggers the thyroid gland in the endocrine system to release thyroid hormone, which
increases metabolic activity and heat production in cells throughout the body. The brain also
signals the adrenal glands to release epinephrine (adrenaline), a hormone that causes the
breakdown of glycogen into glucose, which can be used as an energy source. The breakdown of
glycogen into glucose also results in increased metabolism and heat production.

Positive feedback intensifies a change in the body’s physiological condition rather than
reversing it. A deviation from the normal range results in more change, and the system moves
farther away from the normal range. Positive feedback in the body is normal only when there is
a definite end point. Childbirth and the body’s response to blood loss are two examples of
positive feedback loops that are normal but are activated only when needed.

Childbirth at full term is an example of a situation in which the maintenance of the existing body
state is not desired. Enormous changes in the mother’s body are required to expel the baby at
the end of pregnancy. And the events of childbirth, once begun, must progress rapidly to a
conclusion or the life of the mother and the baby are at risk. The extreme muscular work of labor
and delivery are the result of a positive feedback system.




The first contractions of labor (the stimulus) push the baby toward the cervix (the lowest part of
the uterus). The cervix contains stretch-sensitive nerve cells that monitor the degree of stretching
(the sensors). These nerve cells send messages to the brain, which in turn causes the pituitary
gland at the base of the brain to release the hormone oxytocin into the bloodstream. Oxytocin
causes stronger contractions of the smooth muscles in of the uterus (the effectors), pushing the
baby further down the birth canal. This causes even greater stretching of the cervix. The cycle
of stretching, oxytocin release, and increasingly more forceful contractions stops only when the
baby is born. At this point, the stretching of the cervix halts, stopping the release of oxytocin.

A second example of positive feedback centers on reversing extreme damage to the body.
Following a penetrating wound, the most immediate threat is excessive blood loss. Less blood
circulating means reduced blood pressure and reduced perfusion (penetration of blood) to the
brain and other vital organs. If perfusion is severely reduced, vital organs will shut down and
the person will die. The body responds to this potential catastrophe by releasing substances in
the injured blood vessel wall that begin the process of blood clotting. As each step of clotting
occurs, it stimulates the release of more clotting substances. This accelerates the processes of
clotting and sealing off the damaged area. Clotting is contained in a local area based on the
tightly controlled availability of clotting proteins. This is an adaptive, life-saving cascade of
events.

Learning activities

Practical activity

Choose one volunteer to complete jumping jacks at a pace that can be maintained for eight
minutes. Make sure the volunteer is inactive for a few minutes before the experiment begins.

Measure the heart rate by taking his or her pulse; you can do this one of two ways:

Radial Pulse

Carotid Pulse

Multiply the number of beats in 15 seconds by 4 to calculate the beats per minute. Record the
data in the table below the 0 minutes box.

Measure the person’s perspiration level from 0 to 5: (0 = none; 5 = droplets dripping down the
face). Note this observation in the table.

Have the volunteer do jumping jacks for 2 minutes. After 2 minutes, measure the heart rate,
breathing rate, and perspiration level (refer to steps 2 through 5), and record the data. Measure
the pulse, breathing and perspiration levels as quickly as you can so that the volunteer can
resume exercise. Do not have volunteer wait while you do the calculations and enter the data.

Repeat step 6 three more times (remember, 2 minutes each at a time, totaling 8 minutes) and
record your data at each point.

After the final recording of the dependent variables, wait one minute with the volunteer at reset.
Then measure all of the variables again. Record this data under the “9 Time (Min.)




Self-Assessment
a). Define the following terms

Anterior

Posterior

Lateral

Medial

b).Which are the two main types of reactions that accomplish metabolism?

c).What is the G1 Phase of the cell cycle?

d).What is positive feedback?

e).What events precede the onset of first labor pains?

Model answers

a). Define the following terms

Anterior - (or ventral) describes the front or direction toward the front of the body. The toes
are anterior to the foot.

Posterior - (or dorsal) Describes the back or direction toward the back of the body. The
popliteus is posterior to the patella.

Lateral - describes the side or direction toward the side of the body. The thumb (pollex) is
lateral to the digits

Medial - describes the middle or direction toward the middle of the body. The hallux is the
medial toe.




b). What are the two main types of reactions that accomplish metabolism.
Anabolism is the process whereby smaller, simpler molecules are combined into larger, more
complex substances. Your body can assemble, by utilizing energy, the complex chemicals it
needs by combining small molecules derived from the foods you eat

Catabolism is the process by which larger more complex substances are broken down into
smaller simpler molecules. Catabolism releases energy. The complex molecules found in foods
are broken down so the body can use their parts to assemble the structures and substances needed
for life.

c). Highlight the G1 Phase of the cell cycle.

The first stage of interphase is called the G1 phase (first gap) because, from a microscopic
aspect, little change is visible. However, during the G1 stage, the cell is quite active at the
biochemical level. The cell is accumulating the building blocks of chromosomal DNA and the
associated proteins as well as accumulating sufficient energy reserves to complete the task of
replicating each chromosome in the nucleus.

d).Describe positive feedback

Intensifies a change in the body’s physiological condition rather than reversing it. A deviation
from the normal range results in more change, and the system moves farther away from the
normal range. Positive feedback in the body is normal only when there is a definite end point.
Childbirth and the body’s response to blood loss are two examples of positive feedback loops
that are normal but are activated only when needed.

e). What events precede the onset of first labor pains?

The first contractions of labor (the stimulus) push the baby toward the cervix (the lowest part of
the uterus). The cervix contains stretch-sensitive nerve cells that monitor the degree of stretching
(the sensors). These nerve cells send messages to the brain, which in turn causes the pituitary
gland at the base of the brain to release the hormone oxytocin into the bloodstream. Oxytocin
causes stronger contractions of the smooth muscles in of the uterus (the effectors), pushing the
baby further down the birth canal. This causes even greater stretching of the cervix. The cycle
of stretching, oxytocin release, and increasingly more forceful contractions stops only when the
baby is born. At this point, the stretching of the cervix halts, stopping the release of oxytocin.
Practical activity

Data and Observations:

Table 1: Effect of Exercise
 Total Time             Heart Rate              Breathing Rate         Perspiration Level

 (Minutes)                (Beats        per     (Breaths         per   (Scale of 0 to 5)
                          Minute)               Minute)
 0 – Prior           to   84                    36                     0
 Exercise
 2 Minutes                128                   52                     0
 6 Minutes                96                    36                     1
 8 Minutes                120                   40                     2
 9 Minutes                144                   44                     2




Table 1: shows the heart rate, breathing rate and perspiration level of exercisers over nine
minutes




Table 2: Effects of Exercise: Class Averages
                            Grou      Grou       Grou       Grou       Grou
                            p         p          p          p          p
 Variables Measured                                                              Average
                            1         2          3          4          5         s:
 Heart           Start:     68        104        104        98         84        73
                 Finish     38        152        120        120        144       115
 Rate             :
 Breathing       Start:     20        60         60         16         36        38
 Rate            Finish     68        68         68         32         44        56
                  :
 Perspiratio     Start:     0         0          0          0          0         0
 n               Finish     1         3          0          0          2         1
                  :
 Level
Table 2: shows the averages of the entire group’s heart rate, breathing rate and perspiration
levels at the start and finish of exercising

Graph 1: Effects of Exercise




Analysis:

There is an increase effect of exercise over time on the circulatory and respiratory systems, as
shown in both Table 1 and Table 2. As the students began their exercise in two-minute intervals,
their heart rates increased on average from 73 beats per minute to 115 beats per minute. Shawn’s
individual heart rate began at 84 beats per minute, and after lifting 5-pound weights for 8
minutes, his heart rate increased to 114 beats per minute. Also, his breathing rate showed an
increase from 36 breaths per minute to 44 breaths per minute. Based on this data shown, the
amount that you exercise does effect the circulatory and respiratory systems by causing a, on
average, dramatic increase in beats/breath per minute in the measured variables.




Conclusion:
According to the data collected, the hypothesis that was developed at the beginning of the
experiment: “If effects of exercise and exercise are related, then exercising will increase heart
rate, breathing rate, and perspiration levels”; was accepted. Based on the data shown our
individual group charts and the class averages, the effect that exercise has on the respiratory and
circulatory systems is that it develops an increase in heart rate (Start: 73/ Finish: 115), breathing
rate (Start: 38/ Finish: 56), and perspiration levels (Start: 0/ Finish: 1).

Another process that could have been used to measure the external and internal effects of
exercise on the body could be to also measure the body temperature before and after the exercise
is preformed. This could be a good variable to measure because often the amount of perspiration
found on a body is a result of the internal and external body temperature. The relationship
between the perspiration level and the body temperature is that they are both negative feedback.
After exercise, the body tries to return to homeostasis; so when the body temperature increases
due to exercise, the body perspires to cool off and return to its regular temperature, which is
considered negative feedback.

Tools, equipment, supplies and materials

The following resources are provided;

A functional anatomy laboratory.

Stopwatches

Stethoscope

References

Rotimi, Booktionary. "Anatomy". Archived from the original on 1 August 2017. Retrieved 18
June 2017.

^ "Anatomy of the Human Body". Henry Gray. 20th edition. 1918". Archived from the original
on 16 March 2007. Retrieved 19 March2007.

^ Arráez-Aybar; et al. (2014). "Relevance of human anatomy in daily clinical practice". Annals
of Anatomy-Anatomischer Anzeiger. 192 (6): 341–348.
^ O.D.E. 2nd edition 2015

Bozman, E. F., ed. (2015). Everyman's Encyclopedia: Anatomy. J. M. Dent & Sons. p. 272.
2.1 Learning outcome 2; Demonstrate knowledge of human body fluids and their functions

  Introduction to learning outcome

  This learning outcome specifies the competencies required to identify Components of
  extracellular and intracellular fluids. Importance of body fluids is also explained.

  Performance standard
     i.   Components of extracellular fluid are outlined
    ii.   Components of intracellular fluid are outlined
   iii.   Importance of body electrolytes is described

  Information Sheet

  Introduction

  The chemical reactions of life take place in aqueous solutions. The dissolved substances in a
  solution are called solutes. In the human body, solutes vary in different parts of the body, but
  may include proteins—including those that transport lipids, carbohydrates, and, very
  importantly, electrolytes. Often in medicine, an electrolyte is referred to as a mineral dissociated
  from a salt that carries an electrical charge (an ion). For instance, sodium ions (Na+) and chloride
  ions (Cl–) are often referred to as electrolytes.

  In the body, water moves through semi-permeable membranes of cells and from one
  compartment of the body to another by a process called osmosis. Osmosis is basically the
  diffusion of water from regions of higher concentration to regions of lower concentration, along
  an osmotic gradient across a semi-permeable membrane. As a result, water will move into and
  out of cells and tissues, depending on the relative concentrations of the water and solutes found
  there. An appropriate balance of solutes inside and outside of cells must be maintained to ensure
  normal function.

  Body Water Content
Human beings are mostly water, ranging from about 75 percent of body mass in infants to about
50–60 percent in adult men and women, to as low as 45 percent in old age. The percent of body
water changes with development, because the proportions of the body given over to each organ
and to muscles, fat, bone, and other tissues change from infancy to adulthood. Your brain and
kidneys have the highest proportions of water, which composes 80–85 percent of their masses.
In contrast, teeth have the lowest proportion of water, at 8–10 percent.




Fluid Compartments

Body fluids can be discussed in terms of their specific fluid compartment, a location that is
largely separate from another compartment by some form of a physical barrier. The intracellular
fluid (ICF) compartment is the system that includes all fluid enclosed in cells by their plasma
membranes. Extracellular fluid (ECF) surrounds all cells in the body. Extracellular fluid has two
primary constituents: the fluid component of the blood (called plasma) and the interstitial fluid
(IF) that surrounds all cells not in the blood.




Intracellular Fluid

The ICF lies within cells and is the principal component of the cytosol/cytoplasm. The ICF
makes up about 60 percent of the total water in the human body, and in an average-size adult
male, the ICF accounts for about 25 liters (seven gallons) of fluid. This fluid volume tends to be
very stable, because the amount of water in living cells is closely regulated. If the amount of
water inside a cell falls to a value that is too low, the cytosol becomes too concentrated with
solutes to carry on normal cellular activities; if too much water enters a cell, the cell may burst
and be destroyed.




Extracellular Fluid
The ECF accounts for the other one-third of the body’s water content. Approximately 20 percent
of the ECF is found in plasma. Plasma travels through the body in blood vessels and transports
a range of materials, including blood cells, proteins (including clotting factors and antibodies),
electrolytes, nutrients, gases, and wastes. Gases, nutrients, and waste materials travel between
capillaries and cells through the IF. Cells are separated from the IF by a selectively permeable
cell membrane that helps regulate the passage of materials between the IF and the interior of the
cell.

The body has other water-based ECF. These include the cerebrospinal fluid that bathes the brain
and spinal cord, lymph, the synovial fluid in joints, the pleural fluid in the pleural cavities, the
pericardial fluid in the cardiac sac, the peritoneal fluid in the peritoneal cavity, and the aqueous
humor of the eye. Because these fluids are outside of cells, these fluids are also considered
components of the ECF compartment.




Composition of Body Fluids

The compositions of the two components of the ECF—plasma and IF—are more similar to each
other than either is to the ICF. Blood plasma has high concentrations of sodium, chloride,
bicarbonate, and protein. The IF has high concentrations of sodium, chloride, and bicarbonate,
but a relatively lower concentration of protein. In contrast, the ICF has elevated amounts of
potassium, phosphate, magnesium, and protein. Overall, the ICF contains high concentrations
of potassium and phosphate (HPO42−HPO42−), whereas both plasma and the ECF contain high
concentrations of sodium and chloride.




Most body fluids are neutral in charge. Thus, cations, or positively charged ions, and anions, or
negatively charged ions, are balanced in fluids. As seen in the previous graph, sodium (Na+)
ions and chloride (Cl–) ions are concentrated in the ECF of the body, whereas potassium (K+)
ions are concentrated inside cells. Although sodium and potassium can “leak” through “pores”
into and out of cells, respectively, the high levels of potassium and low levels of sodium in the
ICF are maintained by sodium-potassium pumps in the cell membranes. These pumps use the
energy supplied by ATP to pump sodium out of the cell and potassium into the cell.




Figure 2” Sodium potassium pump




Examples of body fluids;

Amniotic fluid - is the protective liquid contained by the amniotic sac of a gravid amniote. This
fluid serves as a cushion for the growing fetus, but also serves to facilitate the exchange of
nutrients, water, and biochemical products between mother and fetus.

Aqueous humour - is the fluid produced by the eye. It provides nutrition to the eye, as well as
maintains the eye in a pressurized state.

Bile - is a fluid that is made and released by the liver and stored in the gallbladder. Bile helps
with digestion. It breaks down fats into fatty acids, which can be taken into the body by the
digestive tract.

Blood plasma - is a yellowish liquid component of blood that holds the blood cells of whole
blood in suspension. It is the liquid part of the blood that carries cells and proteins throughout
the body. It makes up about 55% of the body's total blood volume.
Breast milk - is milk produced by mammary glands, located in the breast of a human female.
Breast milk is the primary source of nutrition for newborns, containing fat, protein,
carbohydrates and variable minerals and vitamins.

Cerebrospinal fluid - is a clear fluid that surrounds the brain and spinal cord. It cushions the
brain and spinal cord from injury and also serves as a nutrient delivery and waste removal system
for the brain.

Cerumen - Earwax, also known by the medical term cerumen, is a brown, orange, red, yellowish
or gray waxy substance secreted in the ear canal of humans and other mammals. It protects the
skin of the human ear canal, assists in cleaning and lubrication, and provides protection against
bacteria, fungi, and water.

Chyle - Chyle is a milky bodily fluid consisting of lymph and emulsified fats, or free fatty acids.
It is formed in the small intestine during digestion of fatty foods, and taken up by lymph vessels
specifically known as lacteals. The lipids in the chyle are colloidally suspended in chylomicrons.

Exudates - is any fluid that filters from the circulatory system into lesions or areas of
inflammation. It can be a pus-like or clear fluid. When an injury occurs, leaving skin exposed,
it leaks out of the blood vessels and into nearby tissues. The fluid is composed of serum, fibrin,
and leukocytes.

Gastric juice - is a unique combination of hydrochloric acid (HCl), lipase, and pepsin. Its main
function is to inactivate swallowed microorganisms, thereby inhibiting infectious agents from
reaching the intestine.

lymph - is the fluid that flows through the lymphatic system, a system composed of lymph
vessels (channels) and intervening lymph nodes whose function, like the venous system, is to
return fluid from the tissues to the central circulation.

Mucus - is a normal, slippery and stringy fluid substance produced by many lining tissues in the
body. It is essential for body function and acts as a protective and moisturizing layer to keep
critical organs from drying out. Mucus also acts as a trap for irritants like dust, smoke, or
bacteria.
Pericardial fluid - is the serous fluid secreted by the serous layer of the pericardium into the
pericardial cavity. The pericardium consists of two layers, an outer fibrous layer and the inner
serous layer.

Peritoneal fluid - is a serous fluid made by the peritoneum in the abdominal cavity which
lubricates the surface of tissue that lines the abdominal wall and pelvic cavity. It covers most of
the organs in the abdomen. An increased volume of peritoneal fluid is called ascites.

Pleural fluid - pleural effusion, sometimes referred to as “water on the lungs,” is the build-up
of excess fluid between the layers of the pleura outside the lungs. The pleura are thin membranes
that line the lungs and the inside of the chest cavity and act to lubricate and facilitate breathing.

Pus - a thick yellowish or greenish opaque liquid produced in infected tissue, consisting of dead
white blood cells and bacteria with tissue debris and serum.

Saliva - is the watery and usually somewhat frothy substance produced in the mouths of some
animals, including humans. Produced in salivary glands, saliva is 98% water, but it contains
many important substances, including electrolytes, mucus, antibacterial compounds and various
enzymes.

Sebum - is an oily, waxy substance produced by your body's sebaceous glands. It coats,
moisturizes, and protects your skin. It's also the main ingredient in what you might think of as
your body's natural oils.

Serous fluid - is any of various body fluids resembling serum, that are typically pale yellow and
transparent and of a benign nature. The fluid fills the inside of body cavities.

Semen - also known as seminal fluid, is an organic fluid created to contain spermatozoa. It is
secreted by the gonads (sexual glands) and other sexual organs of male or hermaphroditic
animals and can fertilize the female ovum.

Sputum - a mixture of saliva and mucus coughed up from the respiratory tract, typically as a
result of infection or other disease and often examined microscopically to aid medical diagnosis.
Synovial fluid - also called synovia, is a viscous, non-Newtonian fluid found in the cavities of
synovial joints. With its egg white–like consistency, the principal role of synovial fluid is to
reduce friction between the articular cartilage of synovial joints during movement.

Sweat - moisture exuded through the pores of the skin, typically in profuse quantities as a
reaction to heat, physical exertion, fever, or fear.

Tears - are a clear liquid secreted by the lacrimal glands found in the eyes of all land mammals.
Their functions include lubricating the eyes, removing irritants, and aiding the immune system.
Tears also occur as a part of the body's natural pain response.

Urine - is a liquid by-product of metabolism in humans and in many other animals. Urine flows
from the kidneys through the ureters to the urinary bladder. Urination results in urine being
excreted from the body through the urethra.

Vomit - matter vomited from the stomach.

Electrolytes in the human body

Electrolytes are elements and compounds that occur naturally in the body. They control
important physiologic functions.

Examples of electrolytes include:

calcium

chloride

magnesium

phosphate

potassium

sodium
These substances are present in your blood, bodily fluids, and urine. They’re also ingested with
food, drinks, and supplements.

An electrolyte disorder occurs when the levels of electrolytes in your body are either too high
or too low. Electrolytes need to be maintained in an even balance for your body to function
properly. Otherwise, vital body systems can be affected.

Severe electrolyte imbalances can cause serious problems such as coma, seizures, and cardiac
arrest.

Symptoms of electrolyte disorders

Mild forms of electrolyte disorders may not cause any symptoms. Such disorders can go
undetected until they’re discovered during a routine blood test. Symptoms usually start to appear
once a particular disorder becomes more severe.

Not all electrolyte imbalances cause the same symptoms, but many share similar symptoms.

Common symptoms of an electrolyte disorder include:

irregular heartbeat

fast heart rate

fatigue

lethargy

convulsions or seizures

nausea

vomiting

diarrhea or constipation

abdominal cramping
muscle cramping

muscle weakness

irritability

confusion

headaches

numbness and tingling

Call your doctor right away if you’re experiencing any of these symptoms and suspect you might
have an electrolyte disorder. Electrolyte disturbances can become life-threatening if left
untreated.

Causes of electrolyte disorders

Electrolyte disorders are most often caused by a loss of bodily fluids through prolonged
vomiting, diarrhea, or sweating. They may also develop due to fluid loss related to burns.

Certain medications can cause electrolyte disorders as well. In some cases, underlying diseases,
such as acute or chronic kidney disease, are to blame.

The exact cause may vary depending on the specific type of electrolyte disorder.




Types of electrolyte disorders

Elevated levels of an electrolyte are indicated with the prefix “hyper-.” Depleted levels of an
electrolyte are indicated with “hypo-.”

Conditions caused by electrolyte level imbalances include:

calcium: hypercalcemia and hypocalcemia

chloride: hyperchloremia and hypochloremia
magnesium: hypomagnesaemia and hypomagnesemia

phosphate: hyperphosphatemia or hypophosphatemia

potassium: hyperkalemia and hypokalemia

sodium: hypernatremia and hyponatremia




Calcium

Calcium is a vital mineral that your body uses to stabilize blood pressure and control skeletal
muscle contraction. It’s also used to build strong bones and teeth.

Hypercalcemia occurs when you have too much calcium in the blood. This is usually caused by:

kidney disease

thyroid disorders, including hyperparathyroidism

lung diseases, such as tuberculosis or sarcoidosis

certain types of cancer, including lung and breast cancers

excessive use of antacids and calcium or vitamin D supplements

medications such as lithium, theophylline, or certain water pills

Hypocalcemia occurs due to a lack of adequate calcium in the bloodstream. Causes can include:

kidney failure

hypoparathyroidism

vitamin D deficiency

pancreatitis
prostate cancer

malabsorption

certain medications, including heparin, osteoporosis drugs, and antiepileptic drugs




Chloride

Chloride is necessary for maintaining the proper balance of bodily fluids.

Hyperchloremia occurs when there’s too much chloride in the body. It can happen as a result of:

severe dehydration

kidney failure

dialysis

Hypochloremia develops when there’s too little chloride in the body. It’s often caused by sodium
or potassium problems.

Other causes can include:

cystic fibrosis

eating disorders, such as anorexia nervosa

scorpion stings

acute kidney failure




Magnesium
Magnesium is a critical mineral that regulates many important functions, such as:

muscle contraction

heart rhythm

nerve function

Hypermagnesemia means excess amounts of magnesium. This disorder primarily affects people
with Addison’s disease and end-stage kidney disease.

Hypomagnesemia means having too little magnesium in the body. Common causes include:

alcohol use disorder

malnutrition

malabsorption

chronic diarrhea

excessive sweating

heart failure

certain medications, including some diuretics and antibiotics




Potassium

Potassium is particularly important for regulating heart function. It also helps maintain healthy
nerves and muscles.

Hyperkalemia may develop due to high levels of potassium. This condition can be fatal if left
undiagnosed and untreated. It’s typically triggered by:
severe dehydration

kidney failure

severe acidosis, including diabetic ketoacidosis

certain medications, including some blood pressure medications and diuretics

adrenal insufficiency, which is when your cortisol levels are too low

Hypokalemia occurs when potassium levels are too low. This often happens as a result of:

eating disorders

severe vomiting or diarrhea

dehydration

certain medications, including laxatives, diuretics, and corticosteroids.




Phosphate

The kidneys, bones, and intestines work to balance phosphate levels in the body. Phosphate is
necessary for a wide variety of functions and interacts closely with calcium.

Hyperphosphatemia can occur due to:

low calcium levels

chronic kidney disease

severe breathing difficulties

underactive parathyroid glands
severe muscle injury

tumor lysis syndrome, a complication of cancer treatment

excessive use of phosphate-containing laxatives

Low levels of phosphate, or hypophosphatemia, can be seen in:

acute alcohol abuse

severe burns

starvation

vitamin D deficiency

overactive parathyroid glands

certain medications, such as intravenous (IV) iron treatment, niacin (Niacor, Niaspan), and some
antacids




Sodium

Sodium is necessary for the body to maintain fluid balance and is critical for normal body
function. It also helps to regulate nerve function and muscle contraction.

Hypernatremia occurs when there’s too much sodium in the blood. Abnormally high levels of
sodium may be caused by:

inadequate water consumption

severe dehydration

excessive loss of bodily fluids as a result of prolonged vomiting, diarrhea, sweating, or
respiratory illness
certain medications, including corticosteroids

Hyponatremia develops when there’s too little sodium. Common causes of low sodium levels
include:

excessive fluid loss through the skin from sweating or burns

vomiting or diarrhea

poor nutrition

alcohol use disorder

overhydration

thyroid, hypothalamic, or adrenal disorders

liver, heart, or kidney failure

certain medications, including diuretics and seizure medications

syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone (SIADH)

Practical Activity

Using a black marker pen on a white manila paper, draw a well labeled diagram to illustrate the
functioning of the sodium pump.

Self Assessment

a). High four causes of abnormally high sodium levels

b). Highlight five symptoms of electrolyte disorder.

c). Highlight five causes of hypercalcemia.

d). Highlight five causes of hypomagnesia
Responses

a). High four causes of abnormally high sodium levels

inadequate water consumption

severe dehydration

excessive loss of bodily fluids as a result of prolonged vomiting, diarrhea, sweating, or
respiratory illness

certain medications, including corticosteroids

b). Highlight five symptoms of electrolyte disorder.

irregular heartbeat

fast heart rate

fatigue

lethargy

convulsions or seizures

nausea

vomiting

diarrhea or constipation

abdominal cramping

muscle cramping

c). Highlight five causes of hypercalcemia.

kidney disease
thyroid disorders, including hyperparathyroidism

lung diseases, such as tuberculosis or sarcoidosis

certain types of cancer, including lung and breast cancers

excessive use of antacids and calcium or vitamin D supplements




d). Highlight five causes of hypomagnesia

alcohol use disorder

malnutrition

malabsorption

chronic diarrhea

excessive sweating

heart failure

certain medications, including some diuretics and antibiotics

1.2.2.5: Tools, equipment, supplies and materials

Black marker pen

White Manila paper

Anatomy lab

References

Ruppert, Edward E.; Fox, Richard, S.; Barnes, Robert D. (2014). Invertebrate Zoology, 7th
edition. Cengage Learning. pp. 59–60.
  Dorland's (2012). Illustrated Medical Dictionary. Elsevier Saunders. p. 203.

  Dorland's (2012). Illustrated Medical Dictionary. Elsevier Saunders. p. 1002.

  McGrath, J.A.; Eady, R.A.; Pope, F.M. (2014). Rook's Textbook of Dermatology (7th ed.).
  Blackwell Publishing. pp. 3.1–3.6.




Learning Outcome 3: Demonstrate knowledge of body tissues and membranes and their
functions

Introduction to learning outcome

  This learning outcome specifies the knowledge and competencies required to describe type of
  tissues as well as their functions.

Performance standard




Types and structure of tissues are described

Functions of tissues are described

Information Sheet

Introduction

  The term tissue is used to describe a group of cells that are similar in structure and perform a
  specific function. Histology is the field of study that involves the microscopic examination of
  tissue appearance, organization, and function.
Tissues are organized into four broad categories based on structural and functional similarities.
These categories are epithelial, connective, muscle, and nervous.        The primary tissue types
work together to contribute to the overall health and maintenance of the human body. Thus,
any disruption in the structure of a tissue can lead to injury or disease.




Types of tissues

Epithelial tissue refers to groups of cells that cover the exterior surfaces of the body, line
internal cavities and passageways, and form certain glands.

Connective tissue, as its name implies, binds the cells and organs of the body together.

Muscle tissue contracts forcefully when excited, providing movement.

Nervous tissue is also excitable, allowing for the generation and propagation of electrochemical
signals in the form of nerve impulses that communicate between different regions of the body.
Fig: tissues

Connective Tissue Membranes

A connective tissue membrane is built entirely of connective tissue. This type of membrane
may be found encapsulating an organ, such as the kidney, or lining the cavity of a freely movable
joint (e.g., shoulder).   When lining a joint, this membrane is referred to as a synovial
membrane. Cells in the inner layer of the synovial membrane release synovial fluid, a natural
lubricant that enables the bones of a joint to move freely against one another with reduced
friction.

Epithelial Membranes

An epithelial membrane is composed of an epithelial layer attached to a layer of connective
tissue. A mucous membrane, sometimes called a mucosa, lines a body cavity or hollow
passageway that is open to the external environment. This type of membrane can be found
lining portions of the digestive, respiratory, excretory, and reproductive tracts. Mucus, produced
by uniglandular cells and glandular tissue, coats the epithelial layer. The underlying connective
tissue, called the lamina propria (literally “own layer”), helps support the epithelial layer.

A serous membrane lines the cavities of the body that do not open to the external environment.
Serous fluid secreted by the cells of the epithelium lubricates the membrane and reduces
abrasion and friction between organs. Serous membranes are identified according to location.
Three serous membranes are found lining the thoracic cavity; two membranes that cover the
lungs (pleura) and one membrane that covers the heart (pericardium). A fourth serous
membrane, the peritoneum, lines the peritoneal cavity, covering the abdominal organs and
forming double sheets of mesenteries that suspend many of the digestive organs.

A cutaneous membrane is a multi-layered membrane composed of epithelial and connective
tissues. The apical surface of this membrane exposed to the external environment and is covered
with dead, keratinized cells that help protect the body from desiccation and pathogens. The skin
is an example of a cutaneous membrane.

Muscle Tissue

Muscle tissue is a soft tissue that composes muscles in animal bodies, and gives rise to muscles'
ability to contract. It is also referred to as myopropulsive tissue. This is opposed to other
components or tissues in muscle such as tendons or perimysium. It is formed during embryonic
development through a process known as myogenesis. Muscle tissue consists of elongated cells
also called as muscle fibers. This tissue is responsible for movements in our body. Muscles
contain special proteins called contractile protein which contract and relax to cause movement.

Nervous tissue

Nervous tissue, also called neural tissue, is the main tissue component of the nervous system.
The nervous system regulates and controls bodily functions and activity and consists of two
parts: the central nervous system (CNS) comprising the brain and spinal cord, and the peripheral
nervous system (PNS) comprising the branching peripheral nerves. It is composed of neurons,
also known as nerve cells, which receive and transmit impulses, and neuroglia, also known as
glial cells or glia, which assist the propagation of the nerve impulse as well as provide nutrients
to the neurons.

Nervous tissue is made up of different types of neurons, all have an axon. An axon is the long
stem-like part of the cell that sends action potentials to the next cell. Bundles of axons make up
the nerves in the PNS and tracts in the CNS.

Functions of the nervous system are sensory input, integration, control of muscles and glands,
homeostasis, and mental activity.

Practical Activity

Using the anatomy mannequin provided in the skills lab, identify the various muscles and tissues
in the human body.




Self assessment

a). Highlight four types of tissues

b). Describe the muscle tissue

c).What is a cutaneous membrane?

d). What is a serous membrane?

Model Answers

a). Highlight four types of tissues
Epithelial tissue refers to groups of cells that cover the exterior surfaces of the body, line
internal cavities and passageways, and form certain glands.

Connective tissue, as its name implies, binds the cells and organs of the body together.

Muscle tissue contracts forcefully when excited, providing movement.

Nervous tissue is also excitable, allowing for the generation and propagation of electrochemical
signals in the form of nerve impulses that communicate between different regions of the body.

b). Describe the muscle tissue

Muscle tissue is a soft tissue that composes muscles in animal bodies, and gives rise to muscles'
ability to contract. It is also referred to as myopropulsive tissue. This is opposed to other
components or tissues in muscle such as tendons or perimysium. It is formed during embryonic
development through a process known as myogenesis. Muscle tissue consists of elongated cells
also called as muscle fibers. This tissue is responsible for movements in our body. Muscles
contain special proteins called contractile protein which contract and relax to cause movement.

c). what is a cutaneous membrane?

This is a multi-layered membrane composed of epithelial and connective tissues. The apical
surface of this membrane exposed to the external environment and is covered with dead,
keratinized cells that help protect the body from desiccation and pathogens. The skin is an
example of a cutaneous membrane.

d). What is a serous membrane?

A serous membrane lines the cavities of the body that do not open to the external environment.
Serous fluid secreted by the cells of the epithelium lubricates the membrane and reduces
abrasion and friction between organs.

Tools, equipment, supplies and materials

Anatomy and physiology laboratory
  Well labeled charts

  Magnifying lens

  Anatomy mannequins

  References

  Moore, K.; Agur, A.; Dalley, A. F. (2015). "Essesntial Clinical Anatomy". Nervous System (4th
  ed.). Inkling.

  Waggoner, Ben. "Vertebrates: More on Morphology". UCMP. Retrieved 13 July 2011.

  Romer, Alfred Sherwood (1985). The Vertebrate Body. Holt Rinehart & Winston.

  Liem, Karel F.; Warren Franklin Walker (2015). Functional anatomy of the vertebrates: an
  evolutionary perspective. Harcourt College Publishers. p. 277.




Learning outcome 4: Demonstrate knowledge of body cavities

Introduction to learning outcome

  This learning outcome specifies the knowledge and competencies required to identify body
  cavities and describe their contents

  Performance standard

  Body cavities are identified

  Contents of body cavities are described

  Information Sheet

  Introduction
A body cavity is any space or compartment, or potential space in the animal body. Cavities
accommodate organs and other structures; cavities as potential spaces contain fluid.

The two largest human body cavities are the ventral body cavity, and the dorsal body cavity. In
the dorsal body cavity the brain and spinal cord are located.

The membranes that surround the central nervous system organs (the brain and the spinal cord,
in the cranial and spinal cavities are the three meninges. The differently lined spaces contain
different types of fluid. In the meninges for example the fluid is cerebrospinal fluid; in the
abdominal cavity the fluid contained in the peritoneum is a serous fluid.

In amniotes and some invertebrates the peritoneum lines their largest body cavity called the
coelom.

Human body cavities




Fig: Human body cavities

The dorsal (posterior) cavity and the ventral (anterior) cavity are the largest body compartments.

The dorsal body cavity includes the cranial cavity, enclosed by the skull and contains the brain,
and the spinal cavity, enclosed by the spine and contains the spinal cord.The ventral body cavity
includes the thoracic cavity, enclosed by the ribcage and contains the lungs and heart; and the
abdominopelvic cavity. The abdominopelvic cavity can be divided into the abdominal cavity,
enclosed by the ribcage and pelvis and contains the kidneys, ureters, stomach, intestines, liver,
gallbladder, and pancreas; and the pelvic cavity, enclosed by the pelvis and contains bladder,
anus and reproductive system.

Table 4
 Human body cavities and membranes
                                                                                     Membranous
 Name of cavity                                        Principal contents
                                                                                     lining
 Dorsal        Cranial cavity                          Brain                         Meninges
 body
 cavity        Vertebral canal                         Spinal cord                   Meninges

                                                                                     Pericardium
               Thoracic cavity                         Heart, Lungs
                                                                                     Pleural cavity
 Ventral
                                      Abdominal        Digestive
 body                                                                                Peritoneum
               Abdominopelvic         cavity           organs, spleen, kidneys
 cavity
               cavity                 Pelvic           Bladder,      reproductive
                                                                                     Peritoneum
                                      cavity           organs




Table 4: Human body cavities and membranes

Ventral body cavity

The thoracic cavity consists of three cavities that fill the interior area of the chest.

The two pleural cavities are situated on both sides of the body, anterior to the spine and lateral
to the breastbone.

The superior mediastinum is a wedge-shaped cavity located between the superior regions of the
two thoracic cavities.

The pericardial cavity within the mediastinum is located at the center of the chest below the
superior mediastinum. The pericardial cavity roughly outlines the shape of the heart.
The diaphragm divides the thoracic and the abdominal cavities. The abdominal cavity occupies
the entire lower half of the trunk, anterior to the spine. Just under the abdominal cavity, anterior
to the buttocks, is the pelvic cavity. The pelvic cavity is funnel shaped and is located inferior
and anterior to the abdominal cavity.

Together the abdominal and pelvic cavity can be referred to as the abdominopelvic cavity while
the thoracic, abdominal, and pelvic cavities together can be referred to as the ventral body cavity.
Subdivisions of the Posterior (Dorsal) and Anterior (Ventral) Cavities The anterior (ventral)
cavity has two main subdivisions: the thoracic cavity and the abdominopelvic cavity. The
thoracic cavity is the more superior subdivision of the anterior cavity, and it is enclosed by the
rib cage.

The thoracic cavity contains the lungs and the heart, which is located in the mediastinum. The
diaphragm forms the floor of the thoracic cavity and separates it from the more inferior
abdominopelvic cavity. The abdominopelvic cavity is the largest cavity in the body. Although
no membrane physically divides the abdominopelvic cavity, it can be useful to distinguish
between the abdominal cavity, the division that houses the digestive organs, and the pelvic
cavity, the division that houses the organs of reproduction.




Dorsal body cavity

The cranial cavity is a large, bean-shaped cavity filling most of the upper skull where the brain
is located. The spinal cavity is a very narrow, thread-like cavity running from the cranial cavity
down the entire length of the spinal cord.

Together the cranial cavity and spinal (or vertebral) cavity can be referred to as the dorsal body
cavity. In the posterior (dorsal) cavity, the cranial cavity houses the brain, and the spinal cavity
encloses the spinal cord. Just as the brain and spinal cord make up a continuous, uninterrupted
structure, the cranial and spinal cavities that house them are also continuous. The brain and
spinal cord are protected by the bones of the skull and vertebral column and by cerebrospinal
fluid, a colorless fluid produced by the brain, which cushions the brain and spinal cord within
the posterior (dorsal) cavity.




Development

At the end of the third week, the neural tube, which is a fold of one of the layers of the trilaminar
germ disc, called the ectoderm, appears. This layer elevates and closes dorsally, while the gut
tube rolls up and closes ventrally to create a “tube on top of a tube.” The mesoderm, which is
another layer of the trilaminar germ disc, holds the tubes together and the lateral plate mesoderm,
the middle layer of the germ disc, splits to form a visceral layer associated with the gut and a
parietal layer, which along with the overlying ectoderm, forms the lateral body wall. The space
between the visceral and parietal layers of lateral plate mesoderm is the primitive body cavity.
When the lateral body wall folds, it moves ventrally and fuses at the midline. The body cavity
closes, except in the region of the connecting stalk. Here, the gut tube maintains an attachment
to the yolk sac. The yolk sac is a membranous sac attached to the embryo, which provides
nutrients and functions as the circulatory system of the very early embryo.

The lateral body wall folds, pulling the amnion in with it so that the amnion surrounds the
embryo and extends over the connecting stalk, which becomes the umbilical cord, which
connects the fetus with the placenta. If the ventral body wall fails to close, ventral body wall
defects can result, such as ectopia cordis, a congenital malformation in which the heart is
abnormally located outside the thorax. Another defect is gastroschisis, a congenital defect in the
anterior abdominal wall through which the abdominal contents freely protrude. Another
possibility is bladder exstrophy, in which part of the urinary bladder is present outside the body.
In normal circumstances, the parietal mesoderm will form the parietal layer of serous
membranes lining the outside (walls) of the peritoneal, pleural, and pericardial cavities. The
visceral layer will form the visceral layer of the serous membranes covering the lungs, heart,
and abdominal organs. These layers are continuous at the root of each organ as the organs lie in
their respective cavities. The peritoneum, a serum membrane that forms the lining of the
abdominal cavity, forms in the gut layers and in places mesenteries extend from the gut as double
layers of peritoneum. Mesenteries provide a pathway for vessels, nerves, and lymphatics to the
organs. Initially, the gut tube from the caudal end of the foregut to the end of the hindgut is
suspended from the dorsal body wall by dorsal mesentery. Ventral mesentery, derived from the
septum transversum, exists only in the region of the terminal part of the esophagus, the stomach,
and the upper portion of the duodenum.




Function

These cavities contain and protect delicate internal organs, and the ventral cavity allows for
significant changes in the size and shape of the organs as they perform their functions.

Anatomical structures are often described in terms of the cavity in which they reside. The body
maintains its internal organization by means of membranes, sheaths, and other structures that
separate compartments.

The lungs, heart, stomach, and intestines, for example, can expand and contract without
distorting other tissues or disrupting the activity of nearby organs. The ventral cavity includes
the thoracic and abdominopelvic cavities and their subdivisions. The dorsal cavity includes the
cranial and spinal cavities.




Practical activity

Using the mannequin provided, identify the various cavities in the human body.




Self Assessment

a). Highlight three components of the thoracic cavity.

b). Describe the dorsal cavity.

c). Highlight the functions of the body cavities.

d). what is the function of the peritoneum?
Model Answers

 a). Highlight three components of the thoracic cavity.

 The two pleural cavities are situated on both sides of the body, anterior to the spine and lateral
 to the breastbone.

 The superior mediastinum is a wedge-shaped cavity located between the superior regions of the
 two thoracic cavities.

 The pericardial cavity within the mediastinum is located at the center of the chest below the
 superior mediastinum. The pericardial cavity roughly outlines the shape of the heart.




 b). Describe the dorsal cavity.

 The cranial cavity is a large, bean-shaped cavity filling most of the upper skull where the brain
 is located. The spinal cavity is a very narrow, thread-like cavity running from the cranial cavity
 down the entire length of the spinal cord.

 Together the cranial cavity and spinal (or vertebral) cavity can be referred to as the dorsal body
 cavity. In the posterior (dorsal) cavity, the cranial cavity houses the brain, and the spinal cavity

 encloses the spinal cord. Just as the brain and spinal cord make up a continuous, uninterrupted
 structure, the cranial and spinal cavities that house them are also continuous. The brain and
 spinal cord are protected by the bones of the skull and vertebral column and by cerebrospinal
 fluid, a colorless fluid produced by the brain, which cushions the brain and spinal cord within
 the posterior (dorsal) cavity.

 c). Highlight the functions of the body cavities.

 These cavities contain and protect delicate internal organs, and the ventral cavity allows for
 significant changes in the size and shape of the organs as they perform their functions.
Anatomical structures are often described in terms of the cavity in which they reside. The body
maintains its internal organization by means of membranes, sheaths, and other structures that
separate compartments.

The lungs, heart, stomach, and intestines, for example, can expand and contract without
distorting other tissues or disrupting the activity of nearby organs. The ventral cavity includes
the thoracic and abdominopelvic cavities and their subdivisions. The dorsal cavity includes the
cranial and spinal cavities.

d). what is the function of the peritoneum?

The peritoneum, a serum membrane that forms the lining of the abdominal cavity, forms in the
gut layers and in places mesenteries extend from the gut as double layers of peritoneum.

Tools, equipment, supplies and materials

Anatomy and physiology lab

Anatomical models and mannequins

Magnifying lens

References

Fell, C.; Griffith Pearson, F. (November 2017). "Thoracic Surgery Clinics: Historical
Perspectives of Thoracic Anatomy". Thorac Surg Clin. 17 (4):

Newman, Tim (2014) . "Introduction to Physiology: History And Scope". Medicine News
Today.

Zimmer, Carl (2014). "Soul Made Flesh: The Discovery of the Brain – and How It Changed the
World".

Feder, Martin E. (2017). New directions in ecological physiology. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
  Garland, Jr, Theodore; Carter, P. A. (2014). "Evolutionary physiology" (PDF). Annual Review
  of Physiology. 56 (1): 579–621.




Learning Outcome 5: Demonstrate knowledge of the human skeletal system

Introduction to the learning outcome.

  This learning outcome specifies the competencies required to identify divisions of the human
  skeleton, outline components of the axial skeleton as well as describe components of the
  appendicular skeleton. Types of bones are also described.

  Performance Standard
     i.   Divisions of the human skeleton outlined
    ii.   Components of the axial skeleton are described
   iii.   Components of the appendicular skeleton are described
   iv.    Types of bones are described

  Information Sheet

  Introduction

  Human skeleton, the internal skeleton that serves as a framework for the body. This framework
  consists of many individual bones and cartilages. There also are bands of fibrous connective
  tissue the ligaments and the tendons in intimate relationship with the parts of the skeleton. This
  article is concerned primarily with the gross structure and the function of the skeleton of the
  normal human adult.




  Functions of the skeletal System

  The primary organs of the human skeletal system – bones -lie buried within the muscles and
  other soft tissues. Bones are living organs and have the ability to grow.
The six main functions of the skeletal system

Support – Bones form the body's supporting framework. All of the softer tissues of the body
hang from the skeletal system.

Protection – Hard, bony “boxes” protect delicate structures enclosed within them. For example,

our skull protects our brain. Our breastbone and ribs protect our heart and lungs. Our pelvis
protects our intestines and bladder and, in females, our uterus and during pregnancy the
developing foetus.

Movement - Muscles are anchored firmly to bones. As muscles contract and shorten, they pull
on bones and thereby move them.

Mineral storage – Bones act as reserves of minerals important for our body, most notably

calcium and phosphorus. Bones maintain homeostasis of blood calcium.

Growth factor storage - Bones store important growth factors, for example fibroblast growth
factor, which acts on the kidney to reduce phosphate reabsorption. In this function, our bones
are an endocrine organ.

Hemopoiesis – This is the process of blood formation. Blood cells are formed in red bone
marrow.
Figure 3: Skeletal system

The human skeleton, like that of other vertebrates, consists of two principal subdivisions, each
with origins distinct from the others and each presenting certain individual features.

These are

(1) the axial, comprising the vertebral column the spine and much of the skull, and (2)the
appendicular, to which the pelvic (hip) and pectoral (shoulder) girdles and the bones and
cartilages of the limbs belong. Discussed in this article as part of the axial skeleton is a third
subdivision, the visceral, comprising the lower jaw, some elements of the upper jaw, and the
branchial arches, including the hyoid bone.

When one considers the relation of these subdivisions of the skeleton to the soft parts of the
human body such as the nervous system, the digestive system, the respiratory system, the
cardiovascular system, and the voluntary muscles of the muscle system it is clear that the
functions of the skeleton are of three different types: support, protection, and motion. Of these
functions, support is the most primitive and the oldest; likewise, the axial part of the skeleton
was the first to evolve. The vertebral column, corresponding to the notochord in lower
organisms, is the main support of the trunk.
The central nervous system lies largely within the axial skeleton, the brain being well protected
by the cranium and the spinal cord by the vertebral column, by means of the bony neural arches
(the arches of bone that encircle the spinal cord) and the intervening ligaments.

Protection of the heart, lungs, and other organs and structures in the chest creates a problem
somewhat different from that of the central nervous system. These organs, the function of which
involves motion, expansion, and contraction, must have a flexible and elastic protective
covering. Such a covering is provided by the bony thoracic basket, or rib cage, which forms the
skeleton of the wall of the chest, or thorax. The connection of the ribs to the breastbone the
sternum is in all cases a secondary one, brought about by the relatively pliable rib (costal)
cartilages. The small joints between the ribs and the vertebrae permit a gliding motion of the
ribs on the vertebrae during breathing and other activities. The motion is limited by the
ligamentous attachments between ribs and vertebrae.

The third general function of the skeleton is that of motion. The great majority of the skeletal
muscles are firmly anchored to the skeleton, usually to at least two bones and in some cases to
many bones. Thus, the motions of the body and its parts, all the way from the lunge of the
football player to the delicate manipulations of a handicraft artist or of the use of complicated
instruments by a scientist, are made possible by separate and individual engineering
arrangements between muscle and bone.

In this article the parts of the skeleton are described in terms of their sharing in these functions.
The disorders and injuries that can affect the human skeleton are described in the article bone
disease.

Axial And Visceral Skeleton

The cranium

The cranium is the part of the skull that encloses the brain is sometimes called the braincase, but
its intimate relation to the sense organs for sight, sound, smell, and taste and to other structures
makes such a designation somewhat misleading.
Figure 4: The cranium

Development of cranial bones

The cranium is formed of bones of two different types of developmental origin—the
cartilaginous, or substitution, bones, which replace cartilages preformed in the general shape of
the bone; and membrane bones, which are laid down within layers of connective tissue. For the
most part, the substitution bones form the floor of the cranium, while membrane bones form the
sides and roof.

The range in the capacity of the cranial cavity is wide but is not directly proportional to the size
of the skull, because there are variations also in the thickness of the bones and in the size of the
air pockets, or sinuses. The cranial cavity has a rough, uneven floor, but its landmarks and details
of structure generally are consistent from one skull to another.




The cranium forms all the upper portion of the skull, with the bones of the face situated beneath
its forward part. It consists of a relatively few large bones, the frontal bone, the sphenoid bone,
two temporal bones, two parietal bones, and the occipital bone. The frontal bone underlies the
forehead region and extends back to the coronal suture, an arching line that separates the frontal
bone from the two parietal bones, on the sides of the cranium. In front, the frontal bone forms a
joint with the two small bones of the bridge of the nose and with the zygomatic bone (which
forms part of the cheekbone; The facial bones and their complex functions), the sphenoid, and
the maxillary bones. Between the nasal and zygomatic bones, the horizontal portion of the
frontal bone extends back to form a part of the roof of the eye socket, or orbit; it thus serves an
important protective function for the eye and its accessory structures.

Each parietal bone has a generally four-sided outline. Together they form a large portion of the
side walls of the cranium. Each adjoins the frontal, the sphenoid, the temporal, and the occipital
bones and its fellow of the opposite side. They are almost exclusively cranial bones, having less
relation to other structures than the other bones that help to form the cranium.

Interior of the cranium

The interior of the cranium shows a multitude of details, reflecting the shapes of the softer
structures that are in contact with the bones.




The internal surface of the vault is relatively uncomplicated. In the midline front to back, along
the sagittal suture, the seam between the two parietal bones, is a shallow depression—the groove
for the superior longitudinal venous sinus, a large channel for venous blood. A number of
depressions on either side of it mark the sites of the pacchionian bodies, structures that permit
the venous system to absorb cerebrospinal fluid. The large thin-walled venous sinuses all lie
within the cranial cavity. While they are thus protected by the cranium, in many places they are
so close beneath the bones that a fracture or a penetrating wound may tear the sinus wall and
lead to bleeding. The blood frequently is trapped beneath the outermost and toughest brain
covering, the dura mater, in a mass called a subdural hematoma.

Conspicuous markings on the internal surface of the projection of the sphenoid, called the
greater wing, and on the internal surfaces of the parietal and temporal bones are formed by the
middle meningeal artery and its branches, which supply blood to the brain coverings. Injury to
these vessels may lead to extradural hematoma, a mass of blood between the dura mater and the
bone.
In contrast to the vault and sides of the cranium, the base presents an extremely complicated
aspect. It is divided into three major depressions, or fossae, in a descending stair-step
arrangement from front to back. The fossae are divided strictly according to the borders of the
bones of the cranium but are related to major portions of the brain. The anterior cranial fossa
serves as the bed in which rest the frontal lobes of the cerebrum, the large forward part of the
brain. The middle cranial fossa, sharply divided into two lateral halves by a central eminence of
bone, contains the temporal lobes of the cerebrum. The posterior cranial fossa serves as a bed
for the hemispheres of the cerebellum (a mass of brain tissue behind the brain stem and beneath
the rear portion of the cerebrum) and for the front and middle portion of the brain stem. Major
portions of the brain are thus partially enfolded by the bones of the cranial wall.

There are openings in the three fossae for the passage of nerves and blood vessels, and the
markings on the internal surface of the bones are from the attachments of the brain coverings—
the meninges—and venous sinuses and other blood vessels.

Appendicular skeleton

The appendicular skeleton is the portion of the skeleton of vertebrates consisting of the bones
that support the appendages. There are 126 bones. The appendicular skeleton includes the
skeletal elements within the limbs, as well as supporting shoulder girdle pectoral and pelvic
girdle. The word appendicular is the adjective of the noun appendage, which itself means a part
that is joined to something larger.
Of the 206 bones in the human skeleton, the appendicular skeleton comprises 126. Functionally
it is involved in locomotion (lower limbs) of the axial skeleton and manipulation of objects in
the environment (upper limbs).

The appendicular skeleton forms during development from cartilage, by the process of
endochondral ossification.

The appendicular skeleton is divided into six major regions:

Shoulder girdles (4 bones) - Left and right clavicle (2) and scapula (2).

Arms and forearms (6 bones) - Left and right humerus (2) (arm), ulna (2) and radius (2)
(forearm).

Hands (54 bones) - Left and right carpals (16) (wrist), metacarpals (10), proximal phalanges
(10), intermediate phalanges (8) and distal phalanges (10).

Pelvis (2 bones) - left hip bone and right hip bone (2).

Thighs and legs (8 bones) - Left and right femur (2) (thigh), patella (2) (knee), tibia (2) and
fibula (2) (leg).
Feet and ankles (52 bones) - Left and right tarsals (14) (ankle), metatarsals (10), proximal
phalanges (10), intermediate phalanges (8) and distal phalanges (10).

It is important to realize that through anatomical variation it is common for the skeleton to have
many accessory bones (sutural bones in the skull, cervical ribs, lumbar ribs and even extra
lumbar vertebrae).

The appendicular skeleton of 126 bones and the axial skeleton of 80 bones together form the
complete skeleton of 206 bones in the human body. Unlike the axial skeleton, the appendicular
skeleton is unfused. This allows for a much greater range of motion.

Types of bones

Bone, or osseous tissue, is a connective tissue that constitutes the endoskeleton. It contains
specialized cells and a matrix of mineral salts and collagen fibers.

The mineral salts primarily include hydroxyapatite, a mineral formed from calcium phosphate.
Calcification is the process of deposition of mineral salts on the collagen fiber matrix that
crystallizes and hardens the tissue. The process of calcification only occurs in the presence of
collagen fibers.

The bones of the human skeleton are classified by their shape: long bones, short bones, flat
bones, sutural bones, sesamoid bones, and irregular bones.
Figure 5:Types of bones

Long bones are longer than they are wide and have a shaft and two ends. The diaphysis, or
central shaft, contains bone marrow in a marrow cavity. The rounded ends, the epiphyses, are
covered with articular cartilage and are filled with red bone marrow, which produces blood cells.
Most of the limb bones are long bones—for example, the femur, tibia, ulna, and radius.
Exceptions to this include the patella and the bones of the wrist and ankle.

Short bones, or cuboidal bones, are bones that are the same width and length, giving them a
cube-like shape. For example, the bones of the wrist (carpals) and ankle (tarsals) are short bones.

Flat bones are thin and relatively broad bones that are found where extensive protection of
organs is required or where broad surfaces of muscle attachment are required. Examples of flat
bones are the sternum (breast bone), ribs, scapulae (shoulder blades), and the roof of the skull.

Irregular bones are bones with complex shapes. These bones may have short, flat, notched, or
ridged surfaces. Examples of irregular bones are the vertebrae, hip bones, and several skull
bones.
Sesamoid bones are small, flat bones and are shaped similarly to a sesame seed. The patellae
are sesamoid bones. Sesamoid bones develop inside tendons and may be found near joints at the
knees, hands, and feet.

Sutural bones are small, flat, irregularly shaped bones. They may be found between the flat
bones of the skull. They vary in number, shape, size, and position.

1.2.5.4: Practical Activity

Using the skeletal model provided in the anatomy lab, describe the various components of the
human skeletal system.




1.2.5.5: Self Assessment

a). Highlight types of bones

b). Highlight the six major regions of the appendicular skeleton

c). What are the six functions of the skeletal system?

Model Answers

a). Highlight types of bones.

Long bones are longer than they are wide and have a shaft and two ends. The diaphysis, or
central shaft, contains bone marrow in a marrow cavity. The rounded ends, the epiphyses, are
covered with articular cartilage and are filled with red bone marrow, which produces blood cells.
Most of the limb bones are long bones—for example, the femur, tibia, ulna, and radius.
Exception sto this include the patella and the bones of the wrist and ankle.

Short bones, or cuboidal bones, are bones that are the same width and length, giving them a
cube-like shape. For example, the bones of the wrist (carpals) and ankle (tarsals) are short bones.
Flat bones are thin and relatively broad bones that are found where extensive protection of
organs is required or where broad surfaces of muscle attachment are required. Examples of flat
bones are the sternum (breast bone), ribs, scapulae (shoulder blades), and the roof of the skull.

Irregular bones are bones with complex shapes. These bones may have short, flat, notched, or
ridged surfaces. Examples of irregular bones are the vertebrae, hip bones, and several skull
bones.

Sesamoid bones are small, flat bones and are shaped similarly to a sesame seed. The patellae
are sesamoid bones. Sesamoid bones develop inside tendons and may be found near joints at the
knees, hands, and feet.

Sutural bones are small, flat, irregularly shaped bones. They may be found between the flat
bones of the skull. They vary in number, shape, size, and position.

b). Highlight the six major regions of the appendicular skeleton

Shoulder girdles (4 bones) - Left and right clavicle (2) and scapula (2).

Arms and forearms (6 bones) - Left and right humerus (2) (arm), ulna (2) and radius (2)
(forearm).

Hands (54 bones) - Left and right carpals (16) (wrist), metacarpals (10), proximal phalanges
(10), intermediate phalanges (8) and distal phalanges (10).

Pelvis (2 bones) - left hip bone and right hip bone (2).

Thighs and legs (8 bones) - Left and right femur (2) (thigh), patella (2) (knee), tibia (2) and
fibula (2) (leg).

Feet and ankles (52 bones) - Left and right tarsals (14) (ankle), metatarsals (10), proximal
phalanges (10), intermediate phalanges (8) and distal phalanges (10).




c). what are the six functions of the skeletal system?
Support – Bones form the body's supporting framework. All of the softer tissues of the body
hang from the skeletal system.

Protection – Hard, bony “boxes” protect delicate structures enclosed within them. For example,

our skull protects our brain. Our breastbone and ribs protect our heart and lungs. Our pelvis
protects our intestines and bladder and, in females, our uterus and during pregnancy the
developing foetus.

Movement - Muscles are anchored firmly to bones. As muscles contract and shorten, they pull
on bones and thereby move them.

Mineral storage – Bones act as reserves of minerals important for our body, most notably

calcium and phosphorus. Bones maintain homeostasis of blood calcium.

Growth factor storage - Bones store important growth factors, for example fibroblast growth
factor, which acts on the kidney to reduce phosphate reabsorption. In this function, our bones
are an endocrine organ.

Hemopoiesis – This is the process of blood formation. Blood cells are formed in red bone
marrow.

References

Gray, Henry (2014). "Anatomy of the Human Body". Bartleby. Retrieved 4 September2016.

Jump up to:a b "What is Physiology?". Understanding Life. Archived from the original on 19
August 2017. Retrieved 4 September 2016.

"Introduction page, "Anatomy of the Human Body". Henry Gray. 20th edition. 1918". Retrieved
27 March 2007.

Publisher's page for Gray's Anatomy. 39th edition (UK). 2014. ISBN 0-443-07168-3. Retrieved
27 March 2017.
Publisher's page for Gray's Anatomy (39th (US) ed.). 2004. ISBN 0-443-07168-3. Archived from
the original on 9 February 2007. Retrieved 27 March 2017.




Learning outcome 6: Demonstrate knowledge of the major muscles of the body and their
functions

Introduction to learning outcome

This learning outcome specifies the competencies required to identify the structure of muscles
their types and functions.

Performance Standards
   i.   Structure of a muscle outlined
  ii.   Types of muscles outlined
 iii.   Functions of muscles are listed

Information Sheet

The muscular system is an organ system consisting of skeletal, smooth and cardiac muscles. It
permits movement of the body, maintains posture and circulates blood throughout the body. The
muscular systems in vertebrates are controlled through the nervous system although some
muscles (such as the cardiac muscle) can be completely autonomous. Together with the skeletal
system, it forms the musculoskeletal system, which is responsible for movement of the human
body.

Muscles
There are three distinct types of muscles: skeletal muscles, cardiac or heart muscles, and smooth
(non-striated) muscles. Muscles provide strength, balance, posture, movement and heat for the
body to keep warm.




Fig: Muscle structure under the microscope
Skeletal Muscle

Skeletal muscles, like other striated muscles, are composed of myocytes, or muscle fibers,
which are in turn composed of myofibrils, which are composed of sarcomeres, the basic building
block of striated muscle tissue. Upon stimulation by an action potential, skeletal muscles
perform a coordinated contraction by shortening each sarcomere. The best proposed model for
understanding contraction is the sliding filament model of muscle contraction. Within the
sarcomere, actin and myosin fibers overlap in a contractile motion towards each other. Myosin
filaments have club-shaped heads that project toward the actin filaments.

Skeletal muscle

Larger structures along the myosin filament called myosin heads are used to provide attachment
points on binding sites for the actin filaments. The myosin heads move in a coordinated style;
they swivel toward the center of the sarcomere, detach and then reattach to the nearest active
site of the actin filament. This is called a ratchet type drive system

This process consumes large amounts of adenosine triphosphate (ATP), the energy source of the
cell. ATP binds to the cross bridges between myosin heads and actin filaments. The release of
energy powers the swiveling of the myosin head. When ATP is used, it becomes adenosine
diphosphate (ADP), and since muscles store little ATP, they must continuously replace the
discharged ADP with ATP. Muscle tissue also contains a stored supply of a fast acting recharge
chemical, creatine phosphate, which when necessary can assist with the rapid regeneration of
ADP into ATP.

Calcium ions are required for each cycle of the sarcomere. Calcium is released from the
sarcoplasmic reticulum into the sarcomere when a muscle is stimulated to contract. This calcium
uncovers the actin binding sites. When the muscle no longer needs to contract, the calcium ions
are pumped from the sarcomere and back into storage in the sarcoplasmic reticulum.

There are approximately 639 skeletal muscles in the human body.

Cardiac muscle
Heart muscles are distinct from skeletal muscles because the muscle fibers are laterally
connected to each other. Furthermore, just as with smooth muscles, their movement is
involuntary. Heart muscles are controlled by the sinus node influenced by the autonomic
nervous system.

Smooth muscle

Smooth muscles are controlled directly by the autonomic nervous system and are involuntary,
meaning that they are incapable of being moved by conscious thought. Functions such as
heartbeat and lungs (which are capable of being willingly controlled, be it to a limited extent)
are involuntary muscles but are not smooth muscles.

Physiology

Contraction

Neuromuscular junctions are the focal point where a motor neuron attaches to a muscle.
Acetylcholine, (a neurotransmitter used in skeletal muscle contraction) is released from the axon
terminal of the nerve cell when an action potential reaches the microscopic junction called a
synapse.

A group of chemical messengers cross the synapse and stimulate the formation of electrical
changes, which are produced in the muscle cell when the acetylcholine binds to receptors on its
surface. Calcium is released from its storage area in the cell's sarcoplasmic reticulum. An
impulse from a nerve cell causes calcium release and brings about a single, short muscle
contraction called a muscle twitch. If there is a problem at the neuromuscular junction, a very
prolonged contraction may occur, such as the muscle contractions that result from tetanus. Also,
a loss of function at the junction can produce paralysis.

Skeletal muscles are organized into hundreds of motor units, each of which involves a motor
neuron, attached by a series of thin finger-like structures called axon terminals. These attach to
and control discrete bundles of muscle fibers. A coordinated and fine tuned response to a specific
circumstance will involve controlling the precise number of motor units used. While individual
muscle units contract as a unit, the entire muscle can contract on a predetermined basis due to
the structure of the motor unit.
Motor unit coordination, balance, and control frequently come under the direction of the
cerebellum of the brain. This allows for complex muscular coordination with little conscious
effort, such as when one drives a car without thinking about the process.




Tendon

A tendon is a piece of connective tissue that connects a muscle to a bone. When a muscle
contracts, it pulls against the skeleton to create movement. A tendon connects this muscle to a
bone, making this function possible.

Aerobic and anaerobic muscle activity

At rest, the body produces the majority of its ATP aerobically in the mitochondria without
producing lactic acid or other fatiguing byproducts. During exercise, the method of ATP
production varies depending on the fitness of the individual as well as the duration and intensity
of exercise. At lower activity levels, when exercise continues for a long duration (several
minutes or longer), energy is produced aerobically by combining oxygen with carbohydrates
and fats stored in the body.

During activity that is higher in intensity, with possible duration decreasing as intensity
increases, ATP production can switch to anaerobic pathways, such as the use of the creatine
phosphate and the phosphagen system or anaerobic glycolysis. Aerobic ATP production is
biochemically much slower and can only be used for long-duration, low-intensity exercise, but
produces no fatiguing waste products that can not be removed immediately from the sarcomere
and the body, and it results in a much greater number of ATP molecules per fat or carbohydrate
molecule. Aerobic training allows the oxygen delivery system to be more efficient, allowing
aerobic metabolism to begin quicker.

Anaerobic ATP production produces ATP much faster and allows near-maximal intensity
exercise, but also produces significant amounts of lactic acid which renders high-intensity
exercise unsustainable for more than several minutes. The phosphagen system is also anaerobic.
It allows for the highest levels of exercise intensity, but intramuscular stores of phosphocreatine
are very limited and can only provide energy for exercises lasting up to ten seconds. Recovery
is very quick, with full creatine stores regenerated within five minutes.

Practical Activity

By use of a microscope oberve three pre-prepared slides containing skeletal, smooth and cardiac
muscle cells. Draw well labeled diagrams to illustrate them.




Self Assessment

a). Highlight aerobic and anaerobic muscle activity

b).Describe the cardiac muscle

Model answers

a). Highlight aerobic and anaerobic muscle activity

At rest, the body produces the majority of its ATP aerobically in the mitochondria without
producing lactic acid or other fatiguing byproducts. During exercise, the method of ATP
production varies depending on the fitness of the individual as well as the duration and intensity
of exercise. At lower activity levels, when exercise continues for a long duration (several
minutes or longer), energy is produced aerobically by combining oxygen with carbohydrates
and fats stored in the body.

During activity that is higher in intensity, with possible duration decreasing as intensity
increases, ATP production can switch to anaerobic pathways, such as the use of the creatine
phosphate and the phosphagen system or anaerobic glycolysis. Aerobic ATP production is
biochemically much slower and can only be used for long-duration, low-intensity exercise, but
produces no fatiguing waste products that cannot be removed immediately from the sarcomere
and the body, and it results in a much greater number of ATP molecules per fat or carbohydrate
molecule. Aerobic training allows the oxygen delivery system to be more efficient, allowing
aerobic metabolism to begin quicker.
Anaerobic ATP production produces ATP much faster and allows near-maximal intensity
exercise, but also produces significant amounts of lactic acid which renders high-intensity
exercise unsustainable for more than several minutes. The phosphagen system is also anaerobic.
It allows for the highest levels of exercise intensity, but intramuscular stores of phosphocreatine
are very limited and can only provide energy for exercises lasting up to ten seconds. Recovery
is very quick, with full creatine stores regenerated within five minutes.

b). Describe the cardiac muscle

Heart muscles are distinct from skeletal muscles because the muscle fibers are laterally
connected to each other. Furthermore, just as with smooth muscles, their movement is
involuntary. Heart muscles are controlled by the sinus node influenced by the autonomic
nervous system.




References

Gray, Henry (1918). "Anatomy of the Human Body". Bartleby. Retrieved 4 September2016.

^ Jump up to:a b "What is Physiology?". Understanding Life. Archived from the original on 19
August 2017. Retrieved 4 September 2016.

^ "Introduction page, "Anatomy of the Human Body". Henry Gray. 20th edition. 1918".
Retrieved 27 March 2007.

^ Publisher's page for Gray's Anatomy. 39th edition (UK). 2004. ISBN 0-443-07168-3.
Retrieved 27 March 2007.

^ Publisher's page for Gray's Anatomy (39th (US) ed.). 2004. ISBN 0-443-07168-3. Archived
from the original on 9 February 2007. Retrieved 27 March 2007.
Learning outcome 7: Demonstrate knowledge of the body joints

Introduction to learning outcome

  This learning outcome specifies the competencies required to identify the structure of joints,
  their types and functions.

Performance standards
     i.   Structure of joints outlined
    ii.   Types of joints outlined
   iii.   Functions of joints are described

  Information Sheet

  Introduction
The point at which two or more bones meet is called a joint, or articulation. Joints are responsible
for movement, such as the movement of limbs, and stability, such as the stability found in the
bones of the skull.

There are two ways to classify joints: on the basis of their structure or on the basis of their
function. The structural classification divides joints into bony, fibrous, cartilaginous, and
synovial joints depending on the material composing the joint and the presence or absence of a
cavity in the joint.




Fibrous Joints

The bones of fibrous joints are held together by fibrous connective tissue. There is no cavity,
or space, present between the bones and so most fibrous joints do not move at all, or are only
capable of minor movements. There are three types of fibrous joints: sutures, syndesmoses, and
gomphoses. Sutures are found only in the skull and possess short fibers of connective tissue
that hold the skull bones tightly in place.

Syndesmoses are joints in which the bones are connected by a band of connective tissue,
allowing for more movement than in a suture. An example of a syndesmosis is the joint of the
tibia and fibula in the ankle. The amount of movement in these types of joints is determined by
the length of the connective tissue fibers. Gomphoses occur between teeth and their sockets;

the term refers to the way the tooth fits into the socket like a peg. The tooth is connected to the
socket by a connective tissue referred to as the periodontal ligament.

Cartilaginous Joints
Figure 6. Synovial joints

Cartilaginous joints are joints in which the bones are connected by cartilage. There are two
types of cartilaginous joints: synchondroses and symphyses. In a synchondrosis, the bones are
joined by hyaline cartilage. Synchondroses are found in the epiphyseal plates of growing bones
in children. In symphyses, hyaline cartilage covers the end of the bone but the connection
between bones occurs through fibrocartilage. Symphyses are found at the joints between
vertebrae. Either type of cartilaginous joint allows for very little movement.




Synovial Joints

Synovial joints are the only joints that have a space between the adjoining bones. This space is
referred to as the synovial (or joint) cavity and is filled with synovial fluid. Synovial fluid
lubricates the joint, reducing friction between the bones and allowing for greater movement.
The ends of the bones are covered with articular cartilage, a hyaline cartilage, and the entire
joint is surrounded by an articular capsule composed of connective tissue that allows movement
of the joint while resisting dislocation. Articular capsules may also possess ligaments that hold
the bones together. Synovial joints are capable of the greatest movement of the three structural
joint types; however, the more mobile a joint, the weaker the joint. Knees, elbows, and shoulders
are examples of synovial joints.




Classification of Joints on the Basis of Function

The functional classification divides joints into three categories: synarthroses, amphiarthroses,
and diarthroses:

Synarthroses are a joints that are immovable. This includes sutures, gomphoses, and
synchondroses.

Amphiarthroses are joints that allow slight movement, including syndesmoses and symphyses.

Diarthroses are joints that allow for free movement of the joint, as in synovial joints.




Types of Synovial Joints

Synovial joints are further classified into six different categories on the basis of the shape and
structure of the joint. The shape of the joint affects the type of movement permitted by the joint.
These joints can be described as planar, hinge, pivot, condyloid, saddle, or ball-and-socket
joints.
Figure 7: types of synovial joints

Planar Joints

Planar joints have bones with articulating surfaces that are flat or slightly curved faces. These
joints allow for gliding movements, and so the joints are sometimes referred to as gliding joints.
The range of motion is limited in these joints and does not involve rotation. Planar joints are
found in the carpal bones in the hand and the tarsal bones of the foot, as well as between
vertebrae.

Hinge Joints

In hinge joints, the slightly rounded end of one bone fits into the slightly hollow end of the other
bone. In this way, one bone moves while the other remains stationary, like the hinge of a door.
The elbow is an example of a hinge joint. The knee is sometimes classified as a modified hinge
joint

Pivot joints

Consist of the rounded end of one bone fitting into a ring formed by the other bone. This structure
allows rotational movement, as the rounded bone moves around its own axis. An example of a
pivot joint is the joint of the first and second vertebrae of the neck that allows the head to move
back and forth. The joint of the wrist that allows the palm of the hand to be turned up and down
is also a pivot joint.

Condyloid Joints

Condyloid joints consist of an oval-shaped end of one bone fitting into a similarly oval-shaped
hollow of another bone. This is also sometimes called an ellipsoidal joint. This type of joint
allows angular movement along two axes, as seen in the joints of the wrist and fingers, which
can move both side to side and up and down.

Saddle Joints

Saddle joints are so named because the ends of each bone resemble a saddle, with concave and
convex portions that fit together. Saddle joints allow angular movements similar to condyloid
joints but with a greater range of motion. An example of a saddle joint is the thumb joint, which
can move back and forth and up and down, but more freely than the wrist or fingers.

Ball-and-Socket Joints

Ball-and-socket joints possess a rounded, ball-like end of one bone fitting into a cuplike socket
of another bone. This organization allows the greatest range of motion, as all movement types
are possible in all directions. Examples of ball-and-socket joints are the shoulder and hip joints

Movement at Synovial Joints

The wide range of movement allowed by synovial joints produces different types of movements.
The movement of synovial joints can be classified as one of four different types: gliding,
angular, rotational, or special movement.
Gliding Movement

Gliding movements occur as relatively flat bone surfaces move past each other. Gliding
movements produce very little rotation or angular movement of the bones. The joints of the
carpal and tarsal bones are examples of joints that produce gliding movements.

Angular Movement

Angular movements are produced when the angle between the bones of a joint changes. There
are several different types of angular movements, including flexion, extension, hyperextension,
abduction, adduction, and circumduction. Flexion, or bending, occurs when the angle between
the bones decreases. Moving the forearm upward at the elbow or moving the wrist to move the
hand toward the forearm are examples of flexion. Extension is the opposite of flexion in that the
angle between the bones of a joint increases. Straightening a limb after flexion is an example of
extension. Extension past the regular anatomical position is referred to as hyperextension. This
includes moving the neck back to look upward, or bending the wrist so that the hand moves
away from the forearm.

Abduction occurs when a bone moves away from the midline of the body. Examples of
abduction are moving the arms or legs laterally to lift them straight out to the side. Adduction
is the movement of a bone toward the midline of the body. Movement of the limbs inward after
abduction is an example of adduction. Circumduction is the movement of a limb in a circular
motion, as in moving the arm in a circular motion.

Rotational Movement

Rotational movement is the movement of a bone as it rotates around its longitudinal axis.
Rotation can be toward the midline of the body, which is referred to as medial rotation, or away
from the midline of the body, which is referred to as lateral rotation. Movement of the head
from side to side is an example of rotation.

Special Movements

Some movements that cannot be classified as gliding, angular, or rotational are called special
movements. Inversion involves the soles of the feet moving inward, toward the midline of the
body. Eversion is the opposite of inversion, movement of the sole of the foot outward, away
from the midline of the body. Protraction is the anterior movement of a bone in the horizontal
plane. Retraction occurs as a joint moves back into position after protraction. Protraction and
retraction can be seen in the movement of the mandible as the jaw is thrust outwards and then
back inwards. Elevation is the movement of a bone upward, such as when the shoulders are
shrugged, lifting the scapulae. Depression is the opposite of elevation—movement downward
of a bone, such as after the shoulders are shrugged and the scapulae return to their normal
position from an elevated position. Dorsiflexion is a bending at the ankle such that the toes are
lifted toward the knee. Plantar flexion is a bending at the ankle when the heel is lifted, such as
when standing on the toes. Supination is the movement of the radius and ulna bones of the
forearm so that the palm faces forward. Pronation is the opposite movement, in which the palm
faces backward. Opposition is the movement of the thumb toward the fingers of the same hand,
making it possible to grasp and hold objects.

Self Assessment

a). Highlight four types of special movements.

b). Highlight four types of joints

Model Answers

a). Highlight four types of special movements.

. Eversion is the opposite of inversion, movement of the sole of the foot outward, away from
the midline of the body. Protraction is the anterior movement of a bone in the horizontal plane.
Retraction occurs as a joint moves back into position after protraction. Protraction and
retraction can be seen in the movement of the mandible as the jaw is thrust outwards and then
back inwards. Elevation is the movement of a bone upward, such as when the shoulders are
shrugged, lifting the scapulae.

b).Highlight four types of joints.

Hinge Joints
In hinge joints, the slightly rounded end of one bone fits into the slightly hollow end of the other
bone. In this way, one bone moves while the other remains stationary, like the hinge of a door.
The elbow is an example of a hinge joint. The knee is sometimes classified as a modified hinge
joint

Pivot joints

Consist of the rounded end of one bone fitting into a ring formed by the other bone. This structure
allows rotational movement, as the rounded bone moves around its own axis. An example of a
pivot joint is the joint of the first and second vertebrae of the neck that allows the head to move
back and forth. The joint of the wrist that allows the palm of the hand to be turned up and down
is also a pivot joint.




Condyloid Joints

Condyloid joints consist of an oval-shaped end of one bone fitting into a similarly oval-shaped
hollow of another bone. This is also sometimes called an ellipsoidal joint. This type of joint
allows angular movement along two axes, as seen in the joints of the wrist and fingers, which
can move both side to side and up and down.




Saddle Joints

Saddle joints are so named because the ends of each bone resemble a saddle, with concave and
convex portions that fit together. Saddle joints allow angular movements similar to condyloid
joints but with a greater range of motion. An example of a saddle joint is the thumb joint, which
can move back and forth and up and down, but more freely than the wrist or fingers.
References

Principles of Anatomy & Physiology, 12th Edition, Tortora & Derrickson, Pub: Wiley & Sons

"Introduction to Joints (3) – Joints – Classification by Tissue Joining Bones".
anatomy.med.umich.edu.

Saladin, Ken. Anatomy & Physiology. 7th ed. McGraw-Hill Connect. Web. p.274




  Learning outcome 8: Demonstrate knowledge of circulatory system

Introduction to the learning outcome

This learning outcome specifies the competencies required to outline components of circulatory
system, describe systemic and pulmonary circulation, describe the structure and function of
blood, describe the structure and function of the heart and describe the structure and function of
the blood vessels.

Performance Standards

  i.   Components of circulatory system are outlined
 ii.   Systemic and pulmonary circulation are described
 iii.   Structure and function of the blood is described
 iv.    Structure and function of the heart is described
  v.    Structure and function of the blood vessels is described

Information Sheet

Circulatory System - (Cardiovascular & Lymphatic System)

Functions of the Cardiovascular System

   i.   Distributes nutrients (e.g. glucose) and oxygen to all body cells
  ii.   Collects waste products (e.g. urea) and carbon dioxide for excretion
 iii.   Controls blood flow to the skin and extremities to increase or decrease heat loss to the
        environment
 iv.    Distributes hormones to target sites of action
  v.    Aids in body defence mechanisms by delivering antibodies, platelets and leukocytes to
        affected areas of the body

Components of the Cardiovascular System

The heart provides the driving force for the cardiovascular system.

The arteries, which carry blood away from the heart, serve as distribution channels to the organs.

The microcirculation (arterioles, capillaries and venules), which includes the capillaries, serve
as the exchange region.

The veins serve as blood reservoirs and collect the blood to return it to the heart.




The Heart as a Pump

The heart is two pumps in series (right and left sides) that are connected by the pulmonary and
systemic circulations.

Each side of the heart is composed of two chambers: an atrium and a ventricle.
The right atrium receives blood from tissues and organs, and the right ventricle pumps blood at
low pressures through the pulmonary circulation. Blood flows from the right heart, through the
pulmonary artery, to the lungs.

The left atrium receives blood from the lungs via pulmonary veins, and the left ventricle pumps
blood through the systemic circulation. Blood flows from the left heart, through the aorta, to the
systemic organs except the lungs.




Figure 9: The human heart
Parallel Distribution to the Organs

Although the right and left sides of the heart are connected in series, the various organs receive
blood flow through parallel distribution channels.

The parallel arrangement supplies organs with blood that has the same arterial composition
(e.g. same oxygen and carbon dioxide concentrations, pH, glucose, electrolytes like sodium,
potassium and calcium) and essentially the same arterial pressure.

The parallel arrangement also allows for independent regulation of blood flow through
different tissues as their metabolic activities change.

The systemic and pulmonary circulations




Figure 10: Parallel distribution of organs

Forces for blood flow
For fluid flowing through a tube, flow can be represented as the average velocity of movement
(cm/sec) times the cross-sectional area of the tube (cm2).

Blood Flow is defined as the volume of blood moving through a vessel per unit of time.

Blood moves by bulk flow, from a region of high pressure to one of low pressure.

Flow = Δ P (Pressure difference) divided by R (Resistance)

Flow: Blood Flow; R: Arteriolar Resistance




Capillary Exchange of Fluid

The movement of fluids through capillaries results from the pressure (known as hydrostatic
pressure) of the blood pushing against the walls of the capillaries.

When the hydrostatic pressure inside the capillaries (capillary hydrostatic pressure) is greater
than the pressure in the surrounding interstitial space (interstitial fluid hydrostatic pressure),
fluid inside the capillaries is forced out into the interstitial space. This process is also known as
filtration.

When the capillary hydrostatic pressure is less than the interstitial fluid hydrostatic pressure,
fluid moves back into the capillaries.

The reabsorption process prevents too much fluid from leaving the capillaries.

When fluid filters through the capillaries, the protein albumin remains behind in the decreasing
volume of water. Albumin is a large molecule that normally cannot pass through the capillary
membranes.

As the concentration of albumin inside the capillaries increases, fluid begins to move back into
the capillaries through osmosis.

The osmotic (pulling) force of albumin in the intravascular space is called the plasma oncotic
pressure.
In normal conditions, capillary hydrostatic pressure exceeds plasma oncotic pressure in the
arteriole end and falls below it in the venule end.

As a result, capillary filtration occurs along the first half of the vessel and reabsorption occurs
along the second half.

Net filtration of fluid out of the capillaries usually exceeds net reabsorption of fluid into the
capillaries by a slight margin, and this leads to the formation of lymph.

Lymph is a combination of excess filtered fluid, filtered proteins and macromolecules (e.g. fat).
The lymphatic system provides a route for lymph to flow from the interstitial space back into
the circulatory system.




Figure 11: The lymphatic system




Lymph Vessels
The lymph vessels of the lymphatic system return albumin and other interstitial macromolecules
to the circulatory system.

The lymph vessels possess an extensive system of one-way valves that maintain flow toward
the heart.

The lymph collected from the peripheral tissues is returned to the cardiovascular system via the
thoracic duct, which empties into the left subclavian vein.

The GI (gastrointestinal) tract and the liver produce the majority of the lymph.




Veins

The venous system is a low-resistance, low pressure, highly distensible part of the vascular
system.

At normal pressures, the veins are about 20 times more distensible (compliant) than the arteries.
In comparable vessels, the veins provide a larger cross-sectional area than do the arteries.

Therefore, the resistance to flow and the velocity of flow are less in the veins than in the arteries.

The veins of the dependent parts of the body are equipped with valves that prevent the backflow
of venous blood. These valves also support the column of blood so that increases in capillary
pressure in the dependent parts of the body (caused by hydrostatic pressure) are minimized.




Functions of the Venous System

Reservoirs

The veins serve as a fluid reservoir with about 70% of the circulating blood volume is in the
veins at any one time.
Conduits

The systemic veins carry blood from the tissues to the right atrium. The pulmonary veins collect
blood from the lungs and return it to the left atrium.

Factors that enhance venous return

Venoconstriction

Skeletal muscle pump

Contraction of skeletal muscle aids in venous return by compressing the veins between the
contracting skeletal muscles. Competent venous valves prevent backflow during relaxation of
the skeletal muscles.




Respiration

Factors that impede venous return

Peripheral pooling of blood results when an individual rises from a supine to an erect position.
Peripheral pooling of blood decreases venous return (consequently lowering cardiac output and,
possibly, arterial blood pressure as well), but a reflex increase of sympathetic tone to the veins
and heart usually compensates for the lowered arterial blood pressure.

Positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) generated by mechanical ventilation can impede
venous return.

Structure and Function of Blood

Describe the structure and function of blood in the body

Blood is important for regulation of the body’s pH, temperature, osmotic pressure, the
circulation of nutrients and removal of waste, the distribution of hormones from endocrine
glands, and the elimination of excess heat; it also contains components for blood clotting. Blood
is made of of several components, including red blood cells, white blood cells, platelets, and the
plasma, which contains coagulation factors and serum.




The Role of Blood in the Body

Blood, like the human blood is important for regulation of the body’s systems and homeostasis.
Blood helps maintain homeostasis by stabilizing pH, temperature, osmotic pressure, and by
eliminating excess heat. Blood supports growth by distributing nutrients and hormones, and by
removing waste. Red blood cells contain hemoglobin, which binds oxygen. These cells deliver
oxygen to the cells and remove carbon dioxide.

Blood plays a protective role by transporting clotting factors and platelets to prevent blood loss
after injury. Blood also transports the disease-fighting agents white blood cells to sites of
infection. These cells—including neutrophils, monocytes, lymphocytes, eosinophils, and
basophils—are involved in the immune response.

Red Blood Cells

Red blood cells, or erythrocytes (erythro– = “red”; –cyte = “cell”), are specialized cells that
circulate through the body delivering oxygen to cells; they are formed from stem cells in the
bone marrow. In mammals, red blood cells are small biconcave cells that at maturity do not
contain a nucleus or mitochondria and are only 7–8 µm in size. In birds and non-avian reptiles,
a nucleus is still maintained in red blood cells.

The red coloring of blood comes from the iron-containing protein hemoglobin. The principal
job of this protein is to carry oxygen, but it also transports carbon dioxide as well. Hemoglobin
is packed into red blood cells at a rate of about 250 million molecules of hemoglobin per cell.
Each hemoglobin molecule binds four oxygen molecules so that each red blood cell carries one
billion molecules of oxygen. There are approximately 25 trillion red blood cells in the five liters
of blood in the human body, which could carry up to 25 sextillion (25 × 1021) molecules of
oxygen in the body at any time. In mammals, the lack of organelles in erythrocytes leaves more
room for the hemoglobin molecules, and the lack of mitochondria also prevents use of the
oxygen for metabolic respiration. Only mammals have anucleated red blood cells, and some
mammals (camels, for instance) even have nucleated red blood cells. The advantage of nucleated
red blood cells is that these cells can undergo mitosis. Anucleated red blood cells metabolize
anaerobically (without oxygen), making use of a primitive metabolic pathway to produce ATP
and increase the efficiency of oxygen transport.

The small size and large surface area of red blood cells allows for rapid diffusion of oxygen and
carbon dioxide across the plasma membrane. In the lungs, carbon dioxide is released and oxygen
is taken in by the blood. In the tissues, oxygen is released from the blood and carbon dioxide is
bound for transport back to the lungs. Studies have found that hemoglobin also binds nitrous
oxide (NO). NO is a vasodilator that relaxes the blood vessels and capillaries and may help with
gas exchange and the passage of red blood cells through narrow vessels. Nitroglycerin, a heart
medication for angina and heart attacks, is converted to NO to help relax the blood vessels and
increase oxygen flow through the body.

A characteristic of red blood cells is their glycolipid and glycoprotein coating; these are lipids
and proteins that have carbohydrate molecules attached. In humans, the surface glycoproteins
and glycolipids on red blood cells vary between individuals, producing the different blood types,
such as A, B, and O. Red blood cells have an average life span of 120 days, at which time they
are broken down and recycled in the liver and spleen by phagocytic macrophages, a type of
white blood cell.




White Blood Cells

White blood cells, also called leukocytes (leuko = white), make up approximately one percent
by volume of the cells in blood. The role of white blood cells is very different than that of red
blood cells: they are primarily involved in the immune response to identify and target pathogens,
such as invading bacteria, viruses, and other foreign organisms. White blood cells are formed
continually; some only live for hours or days, but some live for years.

The morphology of white blood cells differs significantly from red blood cells. They have nuclei
and do not contain hemoglobin. The different types of white blood cells are identified by their
microscopic appearance after histologic staining, and each has a different specialized function.
The two main groups, both illustrated in are the granulocytes, which include the neutrophils,
eosinophils, and basophils, and the agranulocytes, which include the monocytes and
lymphocytes.




Figure 12: The white blood cells

Granulocytes contain granules in their cytoplasm; the agranulocytes are so named because of
the lack of granules in their cytoplasm. Some leukocytes become macrophages that either stay
at the same site or move through the blood stream and gather at sites of infection or inflammation
where they are attracted by chemical signals from foreign particles and damaged cells.
Lymphocytes are the primary cells of the immune system and include B cells, T cells, and natural
killer cells. B cells destroy bacteria and inactivate their toxins. They also produce antibodies. T
cells attack viruses, fungi, some bacteria, transplanted cells, and cancer cells. T cells attack
viruses by releasing toxins that kill the viruses. Natural killer cells attack a variety of infectious
microbes and certain tumor cells.

Components of Blood

Hemoglobin is responsible for distributing oxygen, and to a lesser extent, carbon dioxide,
throughout the circulatory systems of humans, vertebrates, and many invertebrates. The blood
is more than the proteins, though. Blood is actually a term used to describe the liquid that moves
through the vessels and includes plasma (the liquid portion, which contains water, proteins,
salts, lipids, and glucose) and the cells (red and white cells) and cell fragments called platelets.
Blood plasma is actually the dominant component of blood and contains the water, proteins,
electrolytes, lipids, and glucose. The cells are responsible for carrying the gases (red cells) and
immune the response (white). The platelets are responsible for blood clotting. Interstitial fluid
that surrounds cells is separate from the blood, but in hemolymph, they are combined. In
humans, cellular components make up approximately 45 percent of the blood and the liquid
plasma 55 percent. Blood is 20 percent of a person’s extracellular fluid and eight percent of
weight.

Platelets and Coagulation Factors

Blood must clot to heal wounds and prevent excess blood loss. Small cell fragments called
platelets (thrombocytes) are attracted to the wound site where they adhere by extending many
projections and releasing their contents. These contents activate other platelets and also interact
with other coagulation factors, which convert fibrinogen, a water-soluble protein present in
blood serum into fibrin (a non-water soluble protein), causing the blood to clot. Many of the
clotting factors require vitamin K to work, and vitamin K deficiency can lead to problems with
blood clotting. Many platelets converge and stick together at the wound site forming a platelet
plug (also called a fibrin clot), as illustrated in Figure 4b. The plug or clot lasts for a number of
days and stops the loss of blood. Platelets are formed from the disintegration of larger cells
called megakaryocytes, like that shown in Figure 4a. For each megakaryocyte, 2000–3000
platelets are formed with 150,000 to 400,000 platelets present in each cubic millimeter of blood.
Each platelet is disc shaped and 2–4 μm in diameter. They contain many small vesicles but do
not contain a nucleus.




Figure 13:Platelets

Plasma and Serum
The liquid component of blood is called plasma, and it is separated by spinning or centrifuging
the blood at high rotations (3000 rpm or higher). The blood cells and platelets are separated by
centrifugal forces to the bottom of a specimen tube. The upper liquid layer, the plasma, consists
of 90 percent water along with various substances required for maintaining the body’s pH,
osmotic load, and for protecting the body. The plasma also contains the coagulation factors and
antibodies.

The plasma component of blood without the coagulation factors is called the serum. Serum is
similar to interstitial fluid in which the correct composition of key ions acting as electrolytes is
essential for normal functioning of muscles and nerves. Other components in the serum include
proteins that assist with maintaining pH and osmotic balance while giving viscosity to the blood.
The serum also contains antibodies, specialized proteins that are important for defense against
viruses and bacteria. Lipids, including cholesterol, are also transported in the serum, along with
various other substances including nutrients, hormones, metabolic waste, plus external
substances, such as, drugs, viruses, and bacteria.

Human serum albumin is the most abundant protein in human blood plasma and is synthesized
in the liver. Albumin, which constitutes about half of the blood serum protein, transports
hormones and fatty acids, buffers pH, and maintains osmotic pressures. Immunoglobin is a
protein antibody produced in the mucosal lining and plays an important role in antibody
mediated immunity.

Self Assessment

a). Highlight factors that inhibit venous return

b).Highlight platelet and coagulation factors

Responses

a). Highlight factors that inhibit venous return

Peripheral pooling of blood results when an individual rises from a supine to an erect position.
Peripheral pooling of blood decreases venous return (consequently lowering cardiac output and,
possibly, arterial blood pressure as well), but a reflex increase of sympathetic tone to the veins
and heart usually compensates for the lowered arterial blood pressure.

Positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) generated by mechanical ventilation can impede
venous return.

b). Highlight platelet and coagulation factors

Blood must clot to heal wounds and prevent excess blood loss. Small cell fragments called
platelets (thrombocytes) are attracted to the wound site where they adhere by extending many
projections and releasing their contents. These contents activate other platelets and also interact
with other coagulation factors, which convert fibrinogen, a water-soluble protein present in
blood serum into fibrin (a non-water soluble protein), causing the blood to clot. Many of the
clotting factors require vitamin K to work, and vitamin K deficiency can lead to problems with
blood clotting. Many platelets converge and stick together at the wound site forming a platelet
plug (also called a fibrin clot), as illustrated in Figure 4b. The plug or clot lasts for a number of
days and stops the loss of blood. Platelets are formed from the disintegration of larger cells
called megakaryocytes, like that shown in Figure 4a. For each megakaryocyte, 2000–3000
platelets are formed with 150,000 to 400,000 platelets present in each cubic millimeter of blood.
Each platelet is disc shaped and 2–4 μm in diameter. They contain many small vesicles but do
not contain a nucleus




References

Gray's Anatomy 2008, p. 27.

^ "organ | Definition, meaning & more". www.collinsdictionary.com. Collins Dictionary.
Retrieved 17 September 2016.

^ "Cardiovascular System". U.S. National Cancer Institute. Archived from the originalon 2
February 2007. Retrieved 16 September 2008.
^ Human Biology and Health. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall. 1993. ISBN 0-
13-981176-1.

^ "The Cardiovascular System". State University of New York Downstate Medical Center. 8
March 2008.
  Learning outcome 9: Demonstrate knowledge of the lymphatic system

Introduction to the learning outcome

This learning outcome specifies the competencies required to identify components of the
lymphatic system and describe their functions.

Performance standards
  i.   Components of lymphatic system are identified
 ii.   Functions of the components are described

Information Sheet

Lymphatic system, a subsystem of the circulatory system in the vertebrate body that consists
of a complex network of vessels, tissues, and organs. The lymphatic system helps maintain fluid
balance in the body by collecting excess fluid and particulate matter from tissues and depositing
them in the bloodstream. It also helps defend the body against infection by supplying disease
fighting cells called lymphocytes. This article focuses on the human lymphatic system.

Lymphatic Circulation

The lymphatic system can be thought of as a drainage system needed because, as blood circulates
through the body, blood plasma leaks into tissues through the thin walls of the capillaries. The
portion of blood plasma that escapes is called interstitial or extracellular fluid, and it contains
oxygen, glucose, amino acids, and other nutrients needed by tissue cells. Although most of this
fluid seeps immediately back into the bloodstream, a percentage of it, along with the particulate
matter, is left behind. The lymphatic system removes this fluid and these materials from tissues,
returning them via the lymphatic vessels to the bloodstream, and thus prevents a fluid imbalance
that would result in the organism’s death.
Figure: 14; Lymph nodes

The fluid and proteins within the tissues begin their journey back to the bloodstream by passing
into tiny lymphatic capillaries that infuse almost every tissue of the body. Only a few regions,
including the epidermis of the skin, the mucous membranes, the bone marrow, and the central
nervous system, are free of lymphatic capillaries, whereas regions such as the lungs, gut,
genitourinary system, and dermis of the skin are densely packed with these vessels. Once within
the lymphatic system, the extracellular fluid, which is now called lymph, drains into larger
vessels called the lymphatics. These vessels converge to form one of two large vessels called
lymphatic trunks, which are connected to veins at the base of the neck. One of these trunks, the
right lymphatic duct, drains the upper right portion of the body, returning lymph to the
bloodstream via the right subclavian vein. The other trunk, the thoracic duct, drains the rest of
the body into the left subclavian vein. Lymph is transported along the system of vessels by
muscle contractions, and valves prevent lymph from flowing backward. The lymphatic vessels
are punctuated at intervals by small masses of lymph tissue, called lymph nodes, that remove
foreign materials such as infectious microorganisms from the lymph filtering through them.

Role in immunity

In addition to serving as a drainage network, the lymphatic system helps protect the body against
infection by producing white blood cells called lymphocytes, which help rid the body of disease-
causing microorganisms. The organs and tissues of the lymphatic system are the major sites of
production, differentiation, and proliferation of two types of lymphocytes—the T lymphocytes
and B lymphocytes, also called T cells and B cells. Although lymphocytes are distributed
throughout the body, it is within the lymphatic system that they are most likely to encounter
foreign microorganisms.




Lymphoid Organs

The lymphatic system is commonly divided into the primary lymphoid organs, which are the
sites of B and T cell maturation, and the secondary lymphoid organs, in which further
differentiation of lymphocytes occurs. Primary lymphoid organs include the thymus, bone
marrow, fetal liver, and, in birds, a structure called the bursa of Fabricius. In humans the thymus
and bone marrow are the key players in immune function. All lymphocytes derive from stem
cells in the bone marrow. Stem cells destined to become B lymphocytes remain in the bone
marrow as they mature, while prospective T cells migrate to the thymus to undergo further
growth. Mature B and T lymphocytes exit the primary lymphoid organs and are transported via
the bloodstream to the secondary lymphoid organs, where they become activated by contact
with foreign materials, such as particulate matter and infectious agents, called antigens in this
context.

Thymus

The thymus is located just behind the sternum in the upper part of the chest. It is a bilobed organ
that consists of an outer, lymphocyte-rich cortex and an inner medulla. The differentiation of T
cells occurs in the cortex of the thymus. In humans the thymus appears early in fetal
development and continues to grow until puberty, after which it begins to shrink. The decline of
the thymus is thought to be the reason T-cell production decreases with age.

In the cortex of the thymus, developing T cells, called thymocytes, come to distinguish between
the body’s own components, referred to as “self,” and those substances foreign to the body,
called “nonself.” This occurs when the thymocytes undergo a process called positive selection,
in which they are exposed to self molecules that belong to the major histocompatibility complex
(MHC). Those cells capable of recognizing the body’s MHC molecules are preserved, while
those that cannot bind these molecules are destroyed. The thymocytes then move to the medulla
of the thymus, where further differentiation occurs. There thymocytes that have the ability to
attack the body’s own tissues are destroyed in a process called negative selection.

Positive and negative selection destroy a great number of thymocytes; only about 5 to 10 percent
survive to exit the thymus. Those that survive leave the thymus through specialized passages
called efferent (outgoing) lymphatics, which drain to the blood and secondary lymphoid organs.
The thymus has no afferent (incoming) lymphatics, which supports the idea that the thymus is a
T-cell factory rather than a rest stop for circulating lymphocytes.




Bone marrow

In birds B cells mature in the bursa of Fabricius. (The process of B-cell maturation was
elucidated in birds hence B for bursa.) In mammals the primary organ for B-lymphocyte
development is the bone marrow, although the prenatal site of B-cell differentiation is the fetal
liver. Unlike the thymus, the bone marrow does not atrophy at puberty, and therefore there is no
concomitant decrease in the production of B lymphocytes with age.




Secondary lymphoid organs

Secondary lymphoid organs include the lymph nodes, spleen, and small masses of lymph tissue
such as Peyer’s patches, the appendix, tonsils, and selected regions of the body’s mucosal
surfaces (areas of the body lined with mucous membranes). The secondary lymphoid organs
serve two basic functions: they are a site of further lymphocyte maturation, and they efficiently
trap antigens for exposure to T and B cells.




Lymph nodes
The lymph nodes, or lymph glands, are small, encapsulated bean-shaped structures composed
of lymphatic tissue. Thousands of lymph nodes are found throughout the body along the
lymphatic routes, and they are especially prevalent in areas around the armpits (axillary nodes),
groin (inguinal nodes), neck (cervical nodes), and knees (popliteal nodes). The nodes contain
lymphocytes, which enter from the bloodstream via specialized vessels called the high
endothelial venules. T cells congregate in the inner cortex (paracortex), and B cells are organized
in germinal centres in the outer cortex. Lymph, along with antigens, drains into the node through
afferent (incoming) lymphatic vessels and percolates through the lymph node, where it comes
in contact with and activates lymphocytes. Activated lymphocytes, carried in the lymph, exit the
node through the efferent (outgoing) vessels and eventually enter the bloodstream, which
distributes them throughout the body.

Spleen

The spleen is found in the abdominal cavity behind the stomach. Although structurally similar
to a lymph node, the spleen filters blood rather than lymph. One of its main functions is to bring
blood into contact with lymphocytes. The functional tissue of the spleen is made up of two types
of cells: the red pulp, which contains cells called macrophages that remove bacteria, old blood
cells, and debris from the circulation; and surrounding regions of white pulp, which contain
great numbers of lymphocytes. The splenic artery enters the red pulp through a web of small
blood vessels, and blood-borne microorganisms are trapped in this loose collection of cells until
they are gradually washed out through the splenic vein. The white pulp contains both B and T
lymphocytes. T cells congregate around the tiny arterioles that enter the spleen, while B cells
are located in regions called germinal centres, where the lymphocytes are exposed to antigens
and induced to differentiate into antibody-secreting plasma cells.




Mucosa-associated tissues

Another group of important secondary lymphoid structures is the mucosa-associated lymphoid
tissues. These tissues are associated with mucosal surfaces of almost any organ, but especially
those of the digestive, genitourinary, and respiratory tracts, which are constantly exposed to a
wide variety of potentially harmful microorganisms and therefore require their own system of
antigen capture and presentation to lymphocytes. For example, Peyer’s patches, which are
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissues of the small intestine, sample passing antigens and expose
them to underlying B and T cells. Other, less-organized regions of the gut also play a role as
secondary lymphoid tissue.

Self Assessment

a). Highlight the role of the lymphatic system in immunity

b). Define the lymphatic system

c). Describe the thymus




Responses

a). Highlight the role of the lymphatic system in immunity

In addition to serving as a drainage network, the lymphatic system helps protect the body against
infection by producing white blood cells called lymphocytes, which help rid the body of disease-
causing microorganisms. The organs and tissues of the lymphatic system are the major sites of
production, differentiation, and proliferation of two types of lymphocytes—the T lymphocytes
and B lymphocytes, also called T cells and B cells. Although lymphocytes are distributed
throughout the body, it is within the lymphatic system that they are most likely to encounter
foreign microorganisms.




b). Define the lymphatic system

Lymphatic system, a subsystem of the circulatory system in the vertebrate body that consists
of a complex network of vessels, tissues, and organs. The lymphatic system helps maintain fluid
balance in the body by collecting excess fluid and particulate matter from tissues and depositing
them in the bloodstream. It also helps defend the body against infection by supplying disease
fighting cells called lymphocytes. This article focuses on the human lymphatic system.
c). Describe the thymus

The thymus is located just behind the sternum in the upper part of the chest. It is a bilobed organ
that consists of an outer, lymphocyte-rich cortex and an inner medulla. The differentiation of T
cells occurs in the cortex of the thymus. In humans the thymus appears early in fetal
development and continues to grow until puberty, after which it begins to shrink. The decline of
the thymus is thought to be the reason T-cell production decreases with age.

In the cortex of the thymus, developing T cells, called thymocytes, come to distinguish between
the body’s own components, referred to as “self,” and those substances foreign to the body,
called “nonself.” This occurs when the thymocytes undergo a process called positive selection,
in which they are exposed to self molecules that belong to the major histocompatibility complex
(MHC). Those cells capable of recognizing the body’s MHC molecules are preserved, while
those that cannot bind these molecules are destroyed. The thymocytes then move to the medulla
of the thymus, where further differentiation occurs. There thymocytes that have the ability to
attack the body’s own tissues are destroyed in a process called negative selection.

Positive and negative selection destroy a great number of thymocytes; only about 5 to 10 percent
survive to exit the thymus. Those that survive leave the thymus through specialized passages
called efferent (outgoing) lymphatics, which drain to the blood and secondary lymphoid organs.
The thymus has no afferent (incoming) lymphatics, which supports the idea that the thymus is a
T-cell factory rather than a rest stop for circulating lymphocytes.




References

Gray's Anatomy 2018, p. 27.

^ "organ | Definition, meaning & more". www.collinsdictionary.com. Collins Dictionary.
Retrieved 17 September 2016.
  ^ "Cardiovascular System". U.S. National Cancer Institute. Archived from the originalon 2
  February 2007. Retrieved 16 September 2008.

  ^ Human Biology and Health. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall. 2013. .

  ^ "The Cardiovascular System". State University of New York Downstate Medical Center. 8
  March 2018.




Learning outcome 10: Demonstrate knowledge of the endocrine system and its functions

  Introduction to learning outcome

  This learning outcome specifies the competencies required to identify components of the
  endocrine system as well as hormones and describe their functions.

  Performance standards.
    i.    Components of endocrine system are identified
   ii.    Hormones and their functions are described

Information Sheet

  The endocrine system is a network of glands and organs located throughout the body. It’s similar
  to the nervous system in that it plays a vital role in controlling and regulating many of the body’s
  functions.

  However, while the nervous system uses nerve impulses and neurotransmitters for
  communication, the endocrine system uses chemical messengers called hormones.

  Endocrine System Function

  The endocrine system is responsible for regulating a range of bodily functions through the
  release of hormones.

  Hormones are secreted by the glands of the endocrine system, traveling through the bloodstream
  to various organs and tissues in the body. The hormones then tell these organs and tissues what
  to do or how to function.

  Some examples of bodily functions that are controlled by the endocrine system include:

  metabolism

  growth and development

  sexual function and reproduction

  heart rate

  blood pressure

  appetite

  sleeping and waking cycles
body temperature

Endocrine System Organs

The endocrine system is made up of a complex network of glands, which are organs that secrete
substances.

The glands of the endocrine system are where hormones are produced, stored, and released.
Each gland produces one or more hormones, which go on to target specific organs and tissues
in the body.

The glands of the endocrine system include:

Hypothalamus. While some people don’t consider it a gland, the hypothalamus produces
multiple hormones that control the pituitary gland. It’s also involved in regulating many
functions, including sleep-wake cycles, body temperature, and appetite. It can also regulate the
function of other endocrine glands.

Pituitary. The pituitary gland is located below the hypothalamus. The hormones it produces
affect growth and reproduction. They can also control the function of other endocrine glands.

Pineal. This gland is found in the middle of your brain. It’s important for your sleep-wake
cycles.

Thyroid. The thyroid gland is located in the front part of your neck. It’s very important for
metabolism.

Parathyroid. Also located in the front of your neck, the parathyroid gland is important for
maintaining control of calcium levels in your bones and blood.

Thymus. Located in the upper torso, the thymus is active until puberty and produces hormones
important for the development of a type of white blood cell called a T cell.

Adrenal. One adrenal gland can be found on top of each kidney. These glands produce
hormones important for regulating functions such as blood pressure, heart rate, and stress
response.
Pancreas. The pancreas is located in your abdomen behind your stomach. Its endocrine function
involves controlling blood sugar levels.




Some endocrine glands also have non-endocrine functions. For example, the ovaries and testes
produce hormones, but they also have the non-endocrine function of producing eggs and sperm,
respectively.

Endocrine System hormones

Hormones are the chemicals the endocrine system uses to send messages to organs and tissue
throughout the body. Once released into the bloodstream, they travel to their target organ or
tissue, which has receptors that recognize and react to the hormone.

Below are some examples of hormones that are produced by the endocrine system.




 Hormone                          Secreting         Function
                                  gland(s)
 adrenaline                       adrenal           increases blood pressure, heart rate, and
                                                    metabolism in reaction to stress
 aldosterone                      adrenal           controls the body’s salt and water balance
 cortisol                         adrenal           plays a role in stress response
 dehydroepiandrosterone           adrenal           aids in production of body odor and
 sulfate (DHEA)                                     growth of body hair during puberty
 estrogen                         ovary             works to regulate menstrual cycle,
                                                    maintain pregnancy, and develop female
                                                    sex characteristics; aids in sperm
                                                    production
 follicle stimulating hormone     pituitary         controls the production of eggs and sperm
 (FSH)
 glucagon                         pancreas          helps to increase levels of blood glucose
 insulin                          pancreas          helps to reduce your blood glucose levels
 luteinizing hormone (LH)         pituitary         controls estrogen and testosterone
                                                    production as well as ovulation
 melatonin                        pituitary         controls sleep and wake cycles
 oxytocin                         pituitary          helps with lactation, childbirth, and
                                                     mother-child bonding
 parathyroid hormone              parathyroid        controls calcium levels in bones and blood
 progesterone                     ovary              helps to prepare the body for pregnancy
                                                     when an egg is fertilized
 prolactin                        pituitary          promotes breast-milk production
 testosterone                     ovary, teste,      contributes to sex drive and body density
                                  adrenal            in males and females as well as
                                                     development of male sex characteristics
 thyroid hormone                  thyroid            help to control several body functions,
                                                     including the rate of metabolism and
                                                     energy levels

Table 5: hormones produced by endocrine system

Self Assessment

a). Highlight glands in the endocrine system

b). State bodily functions that are controlled by the endocrine system

c).Describe endocrine system hormones

Responses

a). Highlight glands in the endocrine system

Hypothalamus. While some people don’t consider it a gland, the hypothalamus produces
multiple hormones that control the pituitary gland. It’s also involved in regulating many
functions, including sleep-wake cycles, body temperature, and appetite. It can also regulate the
function of other endocrine glands.

Pituitary. The pituitary gland is located below the hypothalamus. The hormones it produces
affect growth and reproduction. They can also control the function of other endocrine glands.

Pineal. This gland is found in the middle of your brain. It’s important for your sleep-wake
cycles.
Thyroid. The thyroid gland is located in the front part of your neck. It’s very important for
metabolism.

Parathyroid. Also located in the front of your neck, the parathyroid gland is important for
maintaining control of calcium levels in your bones and blood.

Thymus. Located in the upper torso, the thymus is active until puberty and produces hormones
important for the development of a type of white blood cell called a T cell.

Adrenal. One adrenal gland can be found on top of each kidney. These glands produce
hormones important for regulating functions such as blood pressure, heart rate, and stress
response.

Pancreas. The pancreas is located in your abdomen behind your stomach. Its endocrine function
involves controlling blood sugar levels.




b). State bodily functions that are controlled by the endocrine system

metabolism

growth and development

sexual function and reproduction

heart rate

blood pressure

appetite

sleeping and waking cycles

body temperature
  c).Describe endocrine system hormones

  Hormones are the chemicals the endocrine system uses to send messages to organs and tissue
  throughout the body. Once released into the bloodstream, they travel to their target organ or
  tissue, which has receptors that recognize and react to the hormone.

  References

  Endocrine Physiology (4 ed.). McGraw Hill.

  ^ Quesada, Ivan (2008). "Physiology of the pancreatic α-cell and glucagon secretion: role in
  glucose homeostasis and diabetes". Journal of Endocrinology. 199 (1): 5–19. doi:10.1677/JOE-
  08-0290. PMID 18669612.

  ^ "How Does The Pancreas Work?". Informed Health.

  ^ Patel, H.; Jessu, R.; Tiwari, V. (2020). "Physiology, Posterior Pituitary". NCBI. StatPearls.
  PMID 30252386.

  ^ Neave N (2008). Hormones and behaviour: a psychological approach. Cambridge: Cambridge
  Univ. Press. ISBN 978-0-521-69201-4. Lay summary – Project Muse.

  ^ "Hormones". MedlinePlus. U.S. National Library of Medicine.

Learning outcome 11: Demonstrate knowledge of the nervous system and its function

Introduction to the learning outcome

  This learning outcome specifies the competencies required to outline the structure and function
  of a neuron, describe types of neurons, divisions of the nervous system and their components as
  well as outline nervous reflexes.




  1.2.11.2: Performance Standard
    i.   Structure and function of a neuron is outlined
   ii.   Types of neurons are described
   iii.   Divisions of the nervous system and their components are described
   iv.    Nervous reflexes are outlined

Information Sheet

  Functions of the Nervous System

  1. Gathers information from both inside and outside the body - Sensory Function

  2. Transmits information to the processing areas of the brain and spine

  3. Processes the information in the brain and spine – Integration Function

  4. Sends information to the muscles, glands, and organs so they can respond appropriately –
  Motor Function

  It controls and coordinates all essential functions of the body including all other body systems

  allowing the body to maintain homeostasis or its delicate balance.

  The Nervous System is divided into Two Main Divisions: Central Nervous System (CNS) and

  the Peripheral Nervous System (PNS).




  Divisions of the Nervous system
Figure 15




Basic Cells of the Nervous System

Neuron

• Basic functional cell of nervous system

• Transmits impulses (up to 250 mph)
Figure 16




Parts of a Neuron

• Dendrite – receive stimulus and carries it impulses

toward the cell body

• Cell Body with nucleus – nucleus & most of

cytoplasm

• Axon – fiber which carries impulses away from cell body

• Schwann Cells- cells which produce myelin or fat layer in the Peripheral Nervous System

• Myelin sheath – dense lipid layer which insulates the axon – makes the axon look gray

• Node of Ranvier – gaps or nodes in the myelin sheath

• Impulses travel from dendrite to cell body to axon
Three types of Neurons

Sensory neurons – bring messages to CNS

Motor neurons - carry messages from CNS

Interneurons – between sensory & motor neurons in the CNS




Impulses

• A stimulus is a change in the environment with sufficient strength to initiate a response.

• Excitability is the ability of a neuron to respond to the stimulus and convert it into a nerve
impulse

• All of Nothing Rule – The stimulus is either strong enough to start and impulse or nothing
happens

• Impulses are always the same strength along a given neuron and they are self-propagation
– once it starts it continues to the end of the neuron in only one direction- from dendrite to cell
body to axon

• The nerve impulse causes a movement of ions across the cell membrane of the nerve cell.

Synapse

Synapse - small gap or space between the axon of one neuron and the dendrite of another - the

neurons do not actually tough at the synapse.

It is junction between neurons which uses neurotransmitters to start the impulse in the second

neuron or an effector (muscle or gland).
The synapse insures one-way transmission of impulses.
Neurotransmitters
Neurotransmitters – Chemicals in the junction which allow impulses to be started in the second
neuron.

Reflex Arc




Figure 17: Components of a Reflex Arc

A. Receptor - reacts to a stimulus

B. Afferent pathway (sensory neuron) - conducts impulses to the CNS

C. Interneuron - consists of one or more synapses in the CNS (most are in the spine)

D. Efferent pathway (motor neuron) conducts impulses from CNS to effector.

E. Effector - muscle fibers (as in the Hamstring muscle) or glands responds by contracting or
secreting a product.

Spinal reflexes - initiated and completed at the spinal cord level. Occur without the involvement
of higher brain centers.
Central Nervous System

• Brain

Brain stem – medulla, pons, midbrain

Diencephalon – thalamus & hypothalamus

Cerebellem

Cerebrum

• Spine

Spinal Cord

Meninges

Meninges are the three coverings around the brain & spine and help cushion, protect, and nourish
the brain and spinal cord.

• Dura mater is the most outer layer, very tough

• Arachnoid mater is the middle layer and adheres to the dura mater and has weblike attachments
to the innermost layer, the pia mater

• Pia mater is very thin, transparent, but tough, and covers the entire brain, following it into all
its crevices (sulci) and spinal cord

• cerebrospinal fluid, which buffers, nourishes, and detoxifies the brain and spinal cord, flows
through the subarachnoid space, between the arachnoid mater and the pia mater.

Regions of the Brain

Cerebellum – coordination of movement and aspects of motor learning

Cerebrum – conscious activity including perception, emotion, thought, and planning
Thalamus – Brain’s switchboard – filters and then relays information to various brain regions

Medulla – vital reflexes as heart beat and respiration

Brainstem – medulla, pons, and midbrain (involuntary responses) and relays information from
spine to upper brain

Hypothalamus– involved in regulating activities internal organs, monitoring information from
the autonomic nervous system, controlling the pituitary gland and its hormones, and regulating
sleep and appetite.




Figure 18: The brain




Cerebrum

• Is the largest portion of the brain encompasses about two-thirds of the brain mass -

• It consists of two hemispheres divided by a fissure – corpus callosum

• It includes the cerebral cortex, the medullary body, and basal ganglia
• cerebral cortex is the layer of the brain often referred to as gray matter because it has cell
bodies and synapses but no myelin

The cortex (thin layer of tissue) is gray because nerves in this area lack the insulation or white
fatty myelin sheath that makes most other parts of the brain appear to be white.

The cortex covers the outer portion (1.5mm to 5mm) of the cerebrum and cerebellum

The cortex consists of folded bulges called gyri that create deep furrows or fissures called sulci

The folds in the brain add to its surface area which increases the amount of gray matter and the
quantity of information that can be processed.

Medullary body – is the white matter of the cerebrum and consists of myelinated axons

Commisural fibers – conduct impulses between the hemispheres and for corpus callosum

Projection fibers – conduct impulse in and out of the cerebral hemispheres

Association fibers – conduct impulses within the hemispheres

Basal ganglia – masses of gray matter in each hemisphere which are involved in the control of
voluntary muscle movements

Lobes of the Cerebrum

• Frontal – motor area involved in movement and in planning & coordinating behavior

• Parietal – sensory processing, attention, and language

• Temporal – auditory perception, speech, and complex visual perceptions

• Occipital – visual center – plays a role in processing visual information.




Special regions
• Broca’s area – located in the frontal lobe – important in the production of speech

• Wernicke’s area – comprehension of language and the production of meaningful speech

• Limbic System – a group of brain structures (amygdala, hippocampus, septum, basal ganglia,
and others) that help regulate the expression of emotions and emotional memory.

Peripheral Nervous System

Cranial nerves

• 12 pair

• Attached to undersurface of brain

Spinal nerves

• 31 pair

• Attached to spinal cord

Somatic Nervous System (voluntary)

• Relays information from skin, sense organs & skeletal muscles to CNS

• Brings responses back to skeletal muscles for voluntary responses.

Autonomic Nervous System (involuntary)

• Regulates bodies involuntary responses

• Relays information to internal organs

Two divisions

o Sympathetic nervous system – in times of stress

Emergency response
Fight or flight

o Parasympathetic nervous system – when body is at rest or with normal functions

Normal everyday conditions.




Figure 19: Autonomic nervous sytem




Self Assessment

a). Highlight the parts of a neuron.

b). Highlight regions of the brain.

c). Describe meninges
Responses

a). Highlight the parts of a neuron.

• Dendrite – receive stimulus and carries it impulses

toward the cell body

• Cell Body with nucleus – nucleus & most of cytoplasm

• Axon – fiber which carries impulses away from cell body

• Schwann Cells- cells which produce myelin or fat layer in the Peripheral Nervous System

• Myelin sheath – dense lipid layer which insulates the axon – makes the axon look gray

• Node of Ranvier – gaps or nodes in the myelin sheath




b). Highlight regions of the brain.

Cerebellum – coordination of movement and aspects of motor learning

Cerebrum – conscious activity including perception, emotion, thought, and planning

Thalamus – Brain’s switchboard – filters and then relays information to various brain regions

Medulla – vital reflexes as heart beat and respiration

Brainstem – medulla, pons, and midbrain (involuntary responses) and relays information from
spine to upper brain

Hypothalamus– involved in regulating activities internal organs, monitoring information from
the autonomic nervous system, controlling the pituitary gland and its hormones, and regulating
sleep and appetite.

c). Describe meninges
 Meninges are the three coverings around the brain & spine and help cushion, protect, and nourish
  the brain and spinal cord.

 • Dura mater is the most outer layer, very tough

 • Arachnoid mater is the middle layer and adheres to the dura mater and has weblike attachments
  to the innermost layer, the pia mater

 • Pia mater is very thin, transparent, but tough, and covers the entire brain, following it into all
  its crevices (sulci) and spinal cord

 • cerebrospinal fluid, which buffers, nourishes, and detoxifies the brain and spinal cord, flows
  through the subarachnoid space, between the arachnoid mater and the pia mater.

References

  Kandel ER, Schwartz JH, Jessel TM, eds. (2000). "Ch. 4: The cytology of neurons". Principles
  of Neural Science. McGraw-Hill Professional. ISBN 978-0-8385-7701-1.

 ^ Jump up to: Allen NJ, Barres BA (2009). "Neuroscience: Glia – more than just brain glue".
  Nature. 457 (7230): 675–677. Bibcode:2009Natur.457..675A. doi:10.1038/457675a. PMID
  19194443. S2CID 205044137.

 ^ Azevedo FA, Carvalho LR, Grinberg LT, et al. (2009). "Equal numbers of neuronal and
  nonneuronal cells make the human brain an isometrically scaled-up primate brain". J. Comp.
  Neurol. 513 (5): 532–541. doi:10.1002/cne.21974. PMID 19226510. S2CID 5200449.

 ^ Jump up to:a b Kandel ER, Schwartz JH, Jessel TM, eds. (2000). "Ch. 17: The anatomical
  organization of the central nervous system". Principles of Neural Science. McGraw-Hill
  Professional. ISBN 978-0-8385-7701-1.

 ^ Standring, Susan (Editor-in-chief) (2005). Gray's Anatomy (39th ed.). Elsevier Churchill
  Livingstone. pp. 233–234. ISBN 978-0-443-07168-3.

  Learning outcome 12: Demonstrate knowledge of the digestive system and its function
Introduction to learning outcome

This learning outcome specifies the competencies required to identify Components of digestive
system, describe structure and functions of the components as well as describe the process of
digestion.

Performance standards
   i.   Components of digestive system are identified
  ii.   Structure and functions of components are described
 iii.   Process of digestion is described

Information sheet

The human digestive system is the collective name used to describe the alimentary canal, some
accessory organs, and a variety of digestive processes that take place at different levels in the
canal to prepare food eaten in the diet for absorption.

It has a general structure that is modified at different levels to provide for the processes occurring
at each level.

The complex of digestive processes gradually breaks down the foods eaten until they are in a
form suitable for absorption.

After absorption, nutrients are used to synthesize body constituents.

They provide the raw materials for the manufacture of new cells, hormones and enzymes, and
the energy needed for these and other processes and for the disposal of waste materials.
 Figure: The digestive system




 The alimentary canal begins at the mouth, passes through the thorax, abdomen, and pelvis and
 ends at the anus. It is thus a long tube through which food passes. It has various parts that are
 structurally remarkably similar. The parts include:
    1. Mouth                                              5. Small intestine
    2. Pharynx                                            6. Large intestine
    3. Oesophagus                                         7. Rectum and Anal canal.
    4. Stomach

Mouth

 The mouth or oral cavity is bounded by muscles and bones: interiorly —by the lips, posteriorly
 — it is continuous with the oropharynx, laterally —by the muscles of the cheeks, superiorly —
by the bony hard palate and muscular soft palate, inferiorly —by the muscular tongue and the
soft tissues of the floor of the mouth.

It is lined throughout with mucous membrane, consisting of stratified squamous epithelium
containing small mucus-secreting glands.

The palate forms the roof of the mouth and is divided into the anterior hard palate and the
posterior soft palate. The soft palate is muscular, curves downwards from the posterior end of
the hard palate, and blends with the walls of the pharynx at the sides.

The uvula is a curved fold of muscle covered with mucous membrane, hanging down from the
middle of the free border of the soft palate.

It consists of the following important parts:

The Tongue

The tongue is a voluntary muscular structure that occupies the floor of the mouth.

It is attached by its base to the hyoid bone and by a fold of its mucous membrane covering,
called the frenulum, to the floor of the mouth.

The superior surface consists of stratified squamous epithelium, with numerous papillae (little
projections), containing nerve endings of the sense of taste, sometimes called the taste buds.

The tongue plays an important part in:

mastication (chewing)

deglutition (swallowing)

speech

taste

The Teeth
The teeth are embedded in the alveoli or sockets of the alveolar ridges of the mandible and the
maxilla.

Each individual has two sets, the temporary or deciduous teeth, and the permanent teeth.

At birth, the teeth of both dentitions are present in an immature form in the mandible and maxilla.

There are 20 temporary teeth, 10 in each jaw. They begin to erupt when the child is about 6
months old, and should all be present after 24 months.

The permanent teeth begin to replace the deciduous teeth in the 6th year of age and this dentition,
consisting of 32 teeth, is usually complete by the 24th year.

Types and Functions of the teeth

The incisor and canine teeth are the cutting teeth and are used for biting off pieces of food,
whereas the premolar and molar teeth, with broad, flat surfaces, are used for grinding or chewing
food.




The Pharynx




Food passes from the oral cavity into the pharynx then to the esophagus below, with which it is
continuous.

The pharynx is divided for descriptive purposes into three parts, the nasopharynx, oropharynx,
and laryngopharynx.

The nasopharynx is important in respiration. The oropharynx and laryngopharynx are passages
common to both the respiratory and the digestive systems.
Function of Pharynx

The pharynx has roles in both the respiratory and digestive systems and can be thought of as the
point where these systems diverge.

For the digestive system, its muscular walls function in the process of swallowing, and it serves
as a pathway for the movement of food from the mouth to the esophagus.

The constrictive circular muscles of the pharynx’s outer layer play a big role in peristalsis. A
series of contractions will help propel ingested food and drink down the intestinal tract safely.

The inner layer’s longitudinal muscles, on the other hand, will widen the pharynx laterally and
lift it upward, thus allowing the swallowing of ingested food and drink.




The Oesophagus

The esophagus is about 25 cm long and about 2 cm in diameter and lies in the median plane in
the thorax in front of the vertebral column behind the trachea and the heart.

It is continuous with the pharynx above and just below the diaphragm it joins the stomach.

The upper and lower ends of the esophagus are closed by sphincter muscles.

The upper cricopharyngeal sphincter prevents air from passing into the esophagus during
inspiration and the aspiration of oesophageal contents.

The cardiac or lower oesophageal sphincter prevents the reflux of acid gastric contents into the
esophagus.




Functions of Oesophagus
The esophagus serves to pass food and liquids from the mouth down to the stomach. This is
accomplished by periodic contractions (peristalsis).

The esophagus is an important connection to the digestive system through the thoracic cavity,
which protects the heart and lungs.

Two sphincters on either side of the esophagus separate food into small units known as a bolus.




The Stomach

The stomach is a J-shaped dilated portion of the alimentary tract situated in the epigastric,
umbilical, and left hypochondriac regions of the abdominal cavity.

The stomach is continuous with the esophagus at the cardiac sphincter and with the duodenum
at the pyloric sphincter.

It has two curvatures. The lesser curvature is short, lies on the posterior surface of the stomach,
and is the downwards continuation of the posterior wall of the esophagus. Just before the pyloric
sphincter, it curves upwards to complete the J shape.

Where the esophagus joins the stomach the anterior region angles acutely upwards, curves
downwards forming the greater curvature then slightly upwards towards the pyloric sphincter.

The stomach is divided into three regions: the fundus, the body, and the antrum.

At the distal end of the pyloric antrum is the pyloric sphincter, guarding the opening between
the stomach and the duodenum.

Stomach size varies with the volume of food it contains, which may be 1.5 liters or more in an
adult.
In the stomach, gastric muscle contraction consists of a churning movement that breaks down
the bolus and mixes it with gastric juice and peristaltic waves that propel the stomach contents
towards the pylorus.

About 2 liters of gastric juice are secreted daily by special secretory glands in the mucosa.

It consists of Water, mineral salts, mucus secreted by goblet cells in the glands and on the
stomach surface, hydrochloric acid, Intrinsic factor, inactive enzyme precursors, etc.




Figure 21: The stomach




Functions of the Stomach

Temporary storage allowing time for the digestive enzymes, pepsins, to act.

Chemical digestion — pepsins convert proteins to polypeptides.

Mechanical breakdown — the three smooth muscle layers enable the stomach to act as a churn,
gastric juice is added and the contents are liquefied to chime.

Performs limited absorption of water, alcohol and some lipid-soluble drugs
Non-specific defense against microbes — provided by hydrochloric acid in gastric juice.

Preparation of iron for absorption further along the track — the acid environment of the stomach
solubilizes iron salts, which is required before iron can be absorbed

Production of intrinsic factor needed for absorption of vitamin B12 in the terminal ileum

Regulation of the passage of gastric contents into the duodenum. When the chyme is sufficiently
acidified and liquefied, the pyloric antrum forces small jets of gastric contents through the
pyloric sphincter into the duodenum.




The Small Intestine

The small intestine is continuous with the stomach at the pyloric sphincter and leads into the
large intestine at the ileocaecal valve.

It is a little over 5 meters long and lies in the abdominal cavity surrounded by the large intestine.

In the small intestine, the chemical digestion of food is completed and most of the absorption of
nutrients takes place.

The small intestine comprises three main sections continuous with each other:




The duodenum: It is about 25 cm long and curves around the head of the pancreas. Secretions
from the gall bladder and pancreas are released into the duodenum through a common structure,
the hepatopancreatic ampulla, and the opening into the duodenum is guarded by the
hepatopancreatic sphincter (of Oddi).

The jejunum: It is the middle section of the small intestine and is about 2 meters long.
The ileum, or terminal section, is about 3 meters long and ends at the ileocaecal valve, which
controls the flow of material from the ileum to the caecum, the first part of the large intestine,
and prevents regurgitation.




The surface area of the small intestine mucosa is greatly increased by permanent circular folds,
villi, and microvilli.

The villi are tiny finger-like projections of the mucosal layer into the intestinal lumen, about 0.5
to 1 mm long.

Their walls consist of columnar epithelial cells, or enterocytes, with tiny microvilli (1 μm long)
on their free border.

Functions of the small intestine

The small intestine is the part of the intestines where 90% of the digestion and absorption of
food occurs, the other 10% taking place in the stomach and large intestine.

The main function of the small intestine is the absorption of nutrients and minerals from food.

The Large Intestine

It is about 1.5 meters long, beginning at the caecum in the right iliac fossa and terminating at
the rectum and anal canal deep in the pelvis.

Its lumen is larger than that of the small intestine. It forms an arch around the coiled-up small
intestine.

The colon is divided into the caecum, ascending colon, transverse colon, descending colon,
sigmoid colon rectum, and anal canal.
Figure 22: The large Intestine




The caecum

This is the first part of the colon. It is a dilated region which has a blind end inferiorly and is
continuous with the ascending colon superiorly.

Just below the junction of the two, the ileocaecal valve opens from the ileum.

The vermiform appendix is a fine tube, closed at one end, which leads from the caecum. It is
usually about 13 cm long and has the same structure as the walls of the colon but contains more
lymphoid tissue.

The ascending colon

This passes upwards from the caecum to the level of the liver where it curves acutely to the left
at the hepatic flexure to become the transverse colon.
The transverse colon

This is a loop of the colon which extends across the abdominal cavity in front of the duodenum
and the stomach to the area of the spleen where it forms the splenic flexure and curves acutely
downwards to become the descending colon.

The descending colon

This passes down the left side of the abdominal cavity then curves towards the midline. After it
enters the true pelvis it is known as the sigmoid colon.

The sigmoid colon

This part describes an S-shaped curve in the pelvis then continues downwards to become the
rectum.




The Rectum and the anal canal

It is a slightly dilated section of the colon about 13 cm long. It leads from the sigmoid colon and
terminates in the anal canal.

The anal canal is a short passage about 3.8 cm long in the adult and leads from the rectum to the
exterior.

Two sphincter muscles control the anus; the internal sphincter, consisting of smooth muscle
fibers, is under the control of the autonomic nervous system and the external sphincter, formed
by skeletal muscle, is under voluntary control.
Figure 23: The rectum and the anal canal

Functions of the large intestine, rectum and anal canal

Absorption

The contents of the ileum which pass through the ileocaecal valve into the caecum are fluid,
even though some water has been absorbed in the small intestine.

In the large intestine absorption of water continues until the familiar semisolid consistency of
feces is achieved.

Mineral salts, vitamins, and some drugs are also absorbed into the blood capillaries from the
large intestine.

Microbial activity

The large intestine is heavily colonized by certain types of bacteria, which synthesize vitamin K
and folic acid. They include Escherichia coli, Enterobacter aerogenes, Streptococcus faecalis,
and Clostridium perfringens (welchii).

Defaecation

Usually, the rectum is empty, but when a mass movement forces the contents of the sigmoid
colon into the rectum the nerve endings in its walls are stimulated by a stretch.
Defaecation involves involuntary contraction of the muscle of the rectum and relaxation of the
internal anal sphincter.

Contraction of the abdominal muscles and lowering of the diaphragm increases the intra-
abdominal pressure (Valsalva’s maneuver) and so assists the process of defaecation.

Self Assessment

a). Highlight parts of the large intestine.

b). Highlight functions of the stomach

Responses

a). Highlight parts of the large intestine

The caecum

This is the first part of the colon. It is a dilated region which has a blind end inferiorly and is
continuous with the ascending colon superiorly.

Just below the junction of the two, the ileocaecal valve opens from the ileum.

The vermiform appendix is a fine tube, closed at one end, which leads from the caecum. It is
usually about 13 cm long and has the same structure as the walls of the colon but contains more
lymphoid tissue.

The ascending colon

This passes upwards from the caecum to the level of the liver where it curves acutely to the left
at the hepatic flexure to become the transverse colon.

The transverse colon
This is a loop of the colon which extends across the abdominal cavity in front of the duodenum
and the stomach to the area of the spleen where it forms the splenic flexure and curves acutely
downwards to become the descending colon.

The descending colon

This passes down the left side of the abdominal cavity then curves towards the midline. After it
enters the true pelvis it is known as the sigmoid colon.

The sigmoid colon

This part describes an S-shaped curve in the pelvis then continues downwards to become the
rectum.




b). Highlight functions of the stomach

Temporary storage allowing time for the digestive enzymes, pepsins, to act.

Chemical digestion — pepsins convert proteins to polypeptides.

Mechanical breakdown — the three smooth muscle layers enable the stomach to act as a churn,
gastric juice is added and the contents are liquefied to chime.

Performs limited absorption of water, alcohol and some lipid-soluble drugs

Non-specific defense against microbes — provided by hydrochloric acid in gastric juice.

Preparation of iron for absorption further along the track — the acid environment of the stomach
solubilizes iron salts, which is required before iron can be absorbed

Production of intrinsic factor needed for absorption of vitamin B12 in the terminal ileum
  Regulation of the passage of gastric contents into the duodenum. When the chyme is sufficiently
  acidified and liquefied, the pyloric antrum forces small jets of gastric contents through the
  pyloric sphincter into the duodenum.

Learning outcome 13: Demonstrate knowledge of the urinary system and its function

  Introduction to learning outcome

  This learning outcome specifies the competencies required to identify Components of the
  urinary system, describe structure and functions of components and describe process of urine
  formation.

  Performance Standard
     1. Components of urinary system are identified
     2. Structure and functions of components are described
     3. Process of urine formation is described

  Information Sheet

  Thousands of metabolic processes in myriad body cells produce hundreds of waste products.
  The urinary system removes them by filtering and cleansing the blood as it passes through the
  kidneys. Another vital function is the regulation of the volume, acidity, salinity, concentration,
  and chemical composition of blood, lymph, and other body fluids. Under hormonal control, the
  kidneys continually monitor what they release into the urine to maintain a healthy chemical
  balance.




  The urinary system is composed of a pair of kidneys, a pair of ureters, a bladder, and a urethra.
  These components together carry out the urinary system’s function of regulating the volume and
  composition of body fluids, removing waste products from the blood, and expelling the waste
  and excess water from the body in the form of urine. The two kidneys are reddish organs
  resembling beans in shape that are situated on either side of the abdomen just above the waist
  and towards the back of the body. The kidneys contain microscopic filtering units that remove
waste, unwanted minerals, and excess water from the blood as urine. Each kidney is connected
to the bladder by a long tube called a ureter, which transports urine away.




The bladder is a hollow, muscular organ situated centrally in the pelvis; it stores urine until it is
convenient to release it. At a certain volume, stretch receptors in its wall transmit nervous
impulses that initiate a conscious desire to urinate. The urethra then conducts urine from the
bladder to the outside.




Figure 24: The urinary system

THE KIDNEYS

The kidneys sit at the back of the abdominal wall and at the start of the urinary system. These
organs are constantly at work:

Nephrons, tiny structures in the renal pyramids, filter gallons of blood each day.
The kidneys reabsorb vital substances, remove unwanted ones, and return the filtered blood back
to the body.

As if they weren’t busy enough, the kidneys also create urine to remove all the waste.




Figure 25: The kidney

The kidneys are located behind the peritoneum, and so are called retroperitoneal organs. They
sit in the back of the abdomen between the levels of the T12 and L03 vertebrae. The right kidney
is slightly lower than the left kidney to accommodate the liver. Both kidneys are bean-shaped
and about the size of an adult fist.




Blood enters the kidneys through renal arteries. These arteries branch into tiny capillaries that
interact with urinary structures inside the kidneys (namely the nephrons). Here the blood is
filtered. Waste is removed and vital substances are reabsorbed back into the bloodstream. The
filtered blood leaves through the renal veins.
Each kidney contains over 1 million tiny structures called nephrons. The nephrons are located
partly in the cortex and partly inside the renal pyramids, where the nephron tubules make up
most of the pyramid mass. Nephrons perform the primary function of the kidneys: regulating
the concentration of water and other substances in the body. They filter the blood, reabsorb what
the body needs, and excrete the rest as urine.




The kidneys filter unwanted substances from the blood and produce urine to excrete them.

There are 3 main steps of urine formation:

Glomerular filtration,

Reabsorption

Secretion.

These processes ensure that only waste and excess water are removed from the body

Each nephron has a glomerulus, the site of blood filtration. The glomerulus is a network of
capillaries surrounded by a cuplike structure, the glomerular capsule (or Bowman’s capsule). As
blood flows through the glomerulus, blood pressure pushes water and solutes from the capillaries
into the capsule through a filtration membrane. This glomerular filtration begins the urine
formation process.

Each kidney contains over 1 million tiny structures called nephrons. The nephrons are located
partly in the cortex and partly inside the renal pyramids, where the nephron tubules make up
most of the pyramid mass. Nephrons perform the primary function of the kidneys: regulating
the concentration of water and other substances in the body. They filter the blood, reabsorb what
the body needs, and excrete the rest as urine.

Each kidney contains over 1 million tiny structures called nephrons. The nephrons are located
partly in the cortex and partly inside the renal pyramids, where the nephron tubules make up
most of the pyramid mass. Nephrons perform the primary function of the kidneys: regulating
the concentration of water and other substances in the body. They filter the blood, reabsorb what
the body needs, and excrete the rest as urine.




Figure 26: Urine formation

The kidneys filter unwanted substances from the blood and produce urine to excrete them.

There are 3 main steps of urine formation:

Glomerular filtration,

Reabsorption

Secretion.

These processes ensure that only waste and excess water are removed from the body.

Each nephron has a glomerulus, the site of blood filtration. The glomerulus is a network of
capillaries surrounded by a cuplike structure, the glomerular capsule (or Bowman’s capsule).
As blood flows through the glomerulus, blood pressure pushes water and solutes from the
capillaries into the capsule through a filtration membrane.

This glomerular filtration begins the urine formation process.




Figure                       27:                       Glomerular                        filtration
The nephrons of the kidneys process blood and create urine through a process of filtration,
reabsorption, and secretion. Urine is about 95% water and 5% waste products. Nitrogenous
wastes excreted in urine include urea, creatinine, ammonia, and uric acid. Ions such as sodium,
potassium, hydrogen, and calcium are also excreted.




Urine produced in the kidneys travels down the ureters into the urinary bladder. The bladder
expands like an elastic sac to hold more urine. As it reaches capacity, the process of micturition,
or urination, begins. Involuntary muscle movements send signals to the nervous system, putting
the decision to urinate under conscious control.




The internal urethral sphincter and the external urethral sphincter both provide muscle control
for the flow of urine. The internal sphincter is involuntary. It surrounds the opening of the
bladder to the urethra and relaxes to allow urine to pass. The external sphincter is voluntary. It
surrounds the urethra outside the bladder and must be relaxed for urination to occur.




Smooth muscle stretch initiates the micturition reflex by activating stretch receptors in the
bladder wall. This autonomic reflex causes the detrusor muscle to contract and the internal
urethral sphincter muscle to relax, allowing urine to flow into the urethra. The stretch receptors
also send a message to the thalamus and the cerebral cortex, giving voluntary control over the
external urethral sphincter. We usually gain this control of urination between the ages of 2 and
3, as our brains develop.

Self Assessment

a). State the steps involved in urine formation.

b). Describe the kidney

Responses

a). State the steps involved in urine formation

Glomerular filtration,

Reabsorption

Secretion

b). Describe the kidney

The kidneys are located behind the peritoneum, and so are called retroperitoneal organs. They
sit in the back of the abdomen between the levels of the T12 and L03 vertebrae. The right kidney
is slightly lower than the left kidney to accommodate the liver. Both kidneys are bean-shaped
and about the size of an adult fist.
  Blood enters the kidneys through renal arteries. These arteries branch into tiny capillaries that
  interact with urinary structures inside the kidneys (namely the nephrons). Here the blood is
  filtered. Waste is removed and vital substances are reabsorbed back into the bloodstream. The
  filtered blood leaves through the renal veins.




  Each kidney contains over 1 million tiny structures called nephrons. The nephrons are located
  partly in the cortex and partly inside the renal pyramids, where the nephron tubules make up
  most of the pyramid mass. Nephrons perform the primary function of the kidneys: regulating
  the concentration of water and other substances in the body. They filter the blood, reabsorb what
  the body needs, and excrete the rest as urine.

  References

  "The Urinary Tract & How It Works | NIDDK". National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive
  and Kidney Diseases.

  ^ C. Dugdale, David (16 September 2011). "Female urinary tract". MedLine Plus Medical
  Encyclopedia.

  ^ Maton, Anthea; Jean Hopkins; Charles William McLaughlin; Susan Johnson; Maryanna Quon
  Warner; David LaHart; Jill D. Wright (1993). Human Biology and Health. Englewood Cliffs,
  New Jersey, USA: Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-981176-1.

  ^ Caldwell HK, Young WS III, Lajtha A, Lim R (2006). "Oxytocin and Vasopressin: Genetics
  and Behavioral Implications" (PDF). Handbook of Neurochemistry and Molecular
  Neurobiology: Neuroactive Proteins and Peptides (3rd ed.). Berlin: Springer. pp. 573–607.




Learning outcome 14: Demonstrate knowledge of the respiratory system and its function

Introduction to learning outcome
This learning outcome specifies the competencies required to identify Components of the
respiratory system, describe the structure and function of components and describe the
respiration process.

Performance standard
    1. Components of respiratory system are identified
    2. Structure and functions of components are described
    3. Respiration process is described

Information sheet

In biology, respiration has two meanings: - at the cellular level, it refers to the chemical reactions
that take place in the mitochondria, which require oxygen, and are the principle source of energy
for eukaryotic cells; - at the level of the whole organism, it refers to the process of taking in
oxygen from the environment and giving carbon dioxide back to it.




Cells need oxygen to generate ATP in their mitochondria

• Of all organs, your liver has the greatest need: 81 litres of oxygen a day, while your brain
requires 76 litres.

• A top marathoner uses about 500 litres of oxygen in the course of a race.

• The main physiological difference between a sedentary person and a runner is the number of
mitochondria per cell, which increases with training.
Figure28: The respiratory system




Figure 29: The alveoli

A pair of human lungs has some 300 million alveoli, where gas exchange takes place, providing
a respiratory surface of about 70 square meters.
The human respiratory system

Air enters through the nose or mouth and passes into the pharynx, past the larynx, and down the
trachea, bronchi and bronchioles to the alveoli in the lungs.

Gas exchange takes place in the alveoli. The barrier between the air in an alveolus and the blood
in its capillaries is only 0.5 micrometer.

Oxygen and carbon dioxide diffuse into and out of the bloodstream through the capillaries
surrounding the walls of the alveoli.

The trachea, bronchi and bronchioles, which serve mainly to transport air by bulk flow,

are lined with epithelial cells.

• These include both mucus-secreting and ciliated cells.

• The mucus coats the epithelium of the respiratory system and traps foreign particles.

• The cilia beat continuously, pushing mucus and foreign particles toward the pharynx, to

be expelled.

Mechanics of respiration

• Air flows into or out of the lungs when the air pressure within the alveoli differs from the
pressure of the external air atmospheric pressure).

• The pressure in the lungs is varied by changes in the volume of the thoracic cavity, caused by
the contraction and relaxation of the diaphragm and of intercostal (“between the-

ribs”) muscles.

Transport and exchange of gases

• Oxygen is almost insoluble in blood plasma.
• The blood transports oxygen thanks to respiratory pigments which, in vertebrates, are called

hemoglobin. Each hemoglobin molecule can bind four molecules of oxygen.

• In the capillaries of the alveoli, where the partial pressure of oxygen is high, most of the
hemoglobin is combined with oxygen.

• In the tissues, where the partial pressure is lower, oxygen is released from the hemoglobin
molecules into the plasma and diffuses into the tissues.

Carbon dioxide is more soluble than oxygen and some of it is dissolved in the blood.

• However, most CO2 reacts with water to form carbonic acid, a weak acid that dissociates to
form bicarbonate (HCO3-) and hydrogen (H+) ions:

• CO2 + H2O « H2CO3 «HCO3 + H+

Carbon Water Carbonic Bicarbonate Hydrogen

dioxide acid ion ion

• The reaction can go in either direction, depending on the partial pressure of carbon dioxide in
the blood.

Control of Respiration

• The rate and depth of respiration are controlled by respiratory neurons in the brainstem which
activate motor neurons in the spinal cord that cause the diaphragm and intercostal muscles to
contract.

• In addition, chemoreceptor cells, located in the carotid arteries, signal the respiratory neurons
when the concentration of oxygen decreases.

• Centres in the brain and chemoreceptors simultaneously monitor the concentration of dissolved
carbon dioxide and hydrogen.
• The system is highly sensitive to the slightest changes in the chemical composition of the blood
(particularly hydrogen ion, which reflects the concentration of carbon dioxide).

Self Assessment

a). Describe the mechanics of respiration

b). Describe the movement of air from the atmosphere to the alveoli.

Responses

a). Describe the mechanics of respiration

• Air flows into or out of the lungs when the air pressure within the alveoli differs from the
pressure of the external air atmospheric pressure).

• The pressure in the lungs is varied by changes in the volume of the thoracic cavity, caused by
the contraction and relaxation of the diaphragm and of intercostal (“between the-

ribs”) muscles

b). Describe the movement of air from the atmosphere to the alveoli.

Air enters through the nose or mouth and passes into the pharynx, past the larynx, and down the
trachea, bronchi and bronchioles to the alveoli in the lungs.

Gas exchange takes place in the alveoli. The barrier between the air in an alveolus and the blood
in its capillaries is only 0.5 micrometer.

Oxygen and carbon dioxide diffuse into and out of the bloodstream through the capillaries
surrounding the walls of the alveoli.

References
  Maton, Anthea; Hopkins, Jean Susan; Johnson, Charles William; McLaughlin, Maryanna Quon;
  Warner, David; LaHart Wright, Jill (2010). Human Biology and Health. Englewood Cliffs:
  Prentice Hall. pp. 108–118. ISBN 978-0134234359.

  ^ Jump up to:a b c Williams, Peter L.; Warwick, Roger; Dyson, Mary; Bannister, Lawrence H.
  (1989). Gray's Anatomy (Thirty-seventh ed.). Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone. pp. 1278–
  1282. ISBN 0443-041776.

  ^ Lovelock, James (1991). Healing Gaia: Practical medicine for the Planet. New York: Harmony
  Books. pp. 21–34, 73–88. ISBN 0-517-57848-4.

  ^ Shu, BC; Chang, YY; Lee, FY; Tzeng, DS; Lin, HY; Lung, FW (2007-10-31). "Parental
  attachment, premorbid personality, and mental health in young males with hyperventilation
  syndrome". Psychiatry Research. 153 (2): 163–70. doi:10.1016/j.psychres.2006.05.006. PMID
  17659783. S2CID 3931401.

  ^ Henry RP, Swenson ER (June 2000). "The distribution and physiological significance of
  carbonic anhydrase in vertebrate gas exchange organs". Respiration Physiology. 121




Learning outcome 15: Demonstrate knowledge of the special senses and their functions
  Introduction to learning outcome
  This learning outcome specifies the competencies required to identify Sensory organs are
  identified, outline structures of special organs and describe their functions.

  Performance standard
     1. Sensory organs are identified
     2. Structures of special organs are outlined
     3. Functions of special organs are described

Information sheet

  Sense organs
Sensory Receptors - receive input, generate receptor potentials and with enough summation,
generate action potentials in the neurons they are part of or synapse with

5 Types of Sensory Receptors - based on the type of stimuli they detect:

1. Mechanoreceptors - pressure receptors, stretch receptors, and specialized mechanoreceptors
involved in movement and balance.

2. Thermoreceptors - skin and viscera, respond to both external and internal temperature

3. Pain receptors - stimulated by lack of O2, chemicals released from damaged cells and
inflammatory cells

4. Chemoreceptors - detect changes in levels of O2, CO2, and H+ ions (pH) as well as
chemicals that stimulate taste and smell receptors

5. Photoreceptors - stimulated by light

Distribution of Receptors in the body:

Special Senses

• mediated by relatively complex sense organs of the head, innervated by cranial nerves

• vision, hearing, equilibrium, taste and smell

General (somesthetic, somatosensory)

• receptors widely distributed in skin, muscles, tendons, joints, and viscera

• they detect touch, pressure, stretch, heat, cold and pain, blood pressure

Special Senses

Sensation and perception
• Vision – Eye

• Hearing – Ear

• Equilibrium – Ear

• Taste – Taste receptors

• Smell – Olfactory system

General Senses

• Skin – Hot, cold, pressure, pain

• Muscles, joints, and tendons – proprioceptors- stretch receptors respond to stretch or
compression

• Pain Receptors – somatic or visceral

Eye - Vision

Processes

• Light energy is transduced into neural activity

• Neural activity is processed by the brain

• Note: For an analogy, you can imagine taking a picture with a camera. The eye is the camera,
the retina, which is a specialized part of the brain at the back of the eye, is the film, and the parts
of the brain that process visual information is the photoshop.

Human visual systems permit light reflected off distant objects to be:

• Localized relative to the individual within his or her environment

• Identified based on size, shape, color, and past experience
• Perceived to be moving (or not)

• Detected in a wide variety of lighting conditions

Sequence of events

• Light entering the eye is focused on the retina

• Retina converts light energy into neuronal activity

• Axons of the retinal neurons are bundled to form the optic nerves

• Visual information is distributed to several brain structures that perform different functions.




Eye – the organ used to sense light

Three layers –

1. Outer layer consists of sclera and cornea

2. Middle layer consists of choroid, ciliary body and iris

3. Inner layer consists of retina
Figure 30: The eye

Extraocular muscles--attached to the eye and skull and allow movement

Anatomy of the Eye

Gross anatomy

Functions of the major parts of the eye:

• Sclera or Scleroid Layer – (white of eye) the outermost layer that forms the eyeball- a tough
protective layer of connective tissue that helps maintain the shape of the eye and provides an
attachment for the muscles that move the eye

• Conjunctiva--membrane inside the eyelid attached to the sclera

• Cornea - the transparent surface covering the iris and pupil- a clear, dome-shaped part of the
sclera covering the front of the eye through which light enters the eye

• Anterior Chamber – a small chamber between the cornea and the pupil
• Aqueous Humor - fluid behind the cornea - the clear fluid that fills that anterior chamber of
the eye and helps to maintain the shape of the cornea providing most of the nutrients for the lens
and the cornea and involved in waste management in the front of the eye

• Choroid Layer - middle layer of the eye containing may blood vessels

• Ciliary Body - the ciliary body is a circular band of muscle that is connected and sits
immediately behind the iris- produces aqueous humor, changes shape of lens for focusing, and

• Iris - circular muscle that controls the diameter of the pupil - the pigmented front portion of
the choroid layer and contains the blood vessels - it determines the eye color and it controls the
amount of light that enters the eye by changing the size of the pupil (an albino only has the blood
vessels – not pigment so it appears red or pink because of the blood vessels)

• Lens - a crystalline structure located just behind the iris - it focuses light onto the retina

• Pupil - the opening in the center of the iris- it changes size as the amount of light changes (the
more light, the smaller the hole) and it allows light to reach the retina

• Vitreous - a thick, transparent liquid that fills the center of the eye - it is mostly water and
gives the eye its form and shape (also called the vitreous humor)

• Retina - axons of the retina leaving the eye - sensory tissue that lines the back of the eye. It
contains millions of photoreceptors (rods for black & white and cones for color ) that convert
light rays into electrical impulses that are relayed to the brain via the optic nerve

• Optic nerve - the nerve that transmits electrical impulses from the retina to the brain

Opthalmoscopic appearance (Retina as seen through the pupil)

• Note: in photographs, the red appearance of the eye is actually the retina photographed. Double
flash camera causes the pupil to constrict.

• Optic disk (blind spot)--no vision is possible
o Blood vessels originate here. The vessels

shadow the retina

o Optic nerve fibers exit here

o No photoreceptors

• Macula--area of the retina responsible for central vision (vs. peripheral)

• Fovea--center of the retina (where most of the cones are)




Figure 31: The eye

Common eye defects include
• Myopia or nearsightedness where the eyeball is too long or the cornea is too steep;

• Hyperopia or far sightedness where the eyeball is short or lens cannot become round enough:

• Presbyopia where the muscles controlling the bulging of the lens become weak as we age;

• Cataracts where the lens becomes fogged;

• Nyctalopia or night blindness where vision is impaired in dim light and in the dark due to

pigment rhodospin in the rods not functioning properly External features of the eye.




Cross sectional anatomy

• Lens--transparent surface that contributes to the formation of images (w/i 9 meters)

• Ciliary muscles--change the shape of the lens and allow focusing

• Vitreous humor--more viscous than the aqueous humor - Lies between the lens and the retina
and provides spherical shape

• Retina - inner most layer of cells at the back of the eye - Transduces light energy into neural
activity




EAR – HEARING

Outer Ear & ear canal – brings sound into eardrum

Eardrum – vibrates to amplify sound & separates inner and middle ear

Middle ear has 3 small bones or Ossicles = anvil, stirrup, stapes – amplify sound (small bones)
which vibrate sound.
Eustachian tube – connects middle ear to throat and equalizes pressure on eardrum

Cochlea – in inner ear – has receptors for sound & sends signals to brain via Auditory Nerve

Process of hearing:

• Sound waves enter your outer ear and travel through your ear canal to the middle ear.

• The ear canal channels the waves to your eardrum, a thin, sensitive membrane stretched tightly
over the entrance to your middle ear.

• The waves cause your eardrum to vibrate.

• It passes these vibrations on to the hammer, one of three tiny bones in your ear. The hammer
vibrating causes the anvil, the small bone touching the hammer, to vibrate. The anvil passes
these vibrations to the stirrup, another small bone which touches the anvil. From the stirrup, the
vibrations pass into the inner ear.

• The stirrup touches a liquid filled sack and the vibrations travel into the cochlea, which is
shaped like a shell.

• Inside the cochlea, a vestibular system formed by three semicircular canals that are
approximately at right angles to each other and which are responsible for the sense of balance
and spatial orientation.

It has chambers filled with a viscous fluid and small particles (otoliths) containing calcium
carbonate. The movement of these particles over small hair cells in the inner ear sends signals
to the brain that are interpreted as motion and acceleration. The brain processes the information
from the ear and lets us distinguish between different types of sounds.\
Figure 32: The Ear




Ear – Equilibrium

Equilibrium

• Equilibrium is a response to movements of the head - Example: a cat landing on its feet if
dropped from upside down

• Vestibular Apparatus: the equilibrium receptors of the inner ear

• Divided into static and dynamic equilibrium

Static Equilibrium

• When the body is not moving

• Maculae: receptors within the membrane sacs of the vestibule that report on the position of
the head with respect to the pull of gravity when the body is not moving.
• Each macula is a patch of receptor cells with their “hairs” embedded in the otolithic membrane

• Otolithic Membrane: a jelly-like substance containing otoliths

• Otoliths: tiny stones made of calcium salts that roll in response to changes in the pull of gravity.
When otoliths move, they pull on the gel and this bends the hairs. Activated hair cells send
impulses along the vestibular nerve

• Vestibular Nerve: (Cranial Nerve VIII) transmits

signals to the cerebellum

Dynamic Equilibrium

• Receptors in the semicircular canals respond to angular or rotary movements of the head.

• Semicircular canals are oriented in the three planes of space

• Crista Ampullaris: receptor region that consists of a tuft of hair cells covered with a gelatinous
cap called the cupula

• When the head moves in an angular direction:

o The endomlymph lags behind

o As the cupula drags against the stationaryendolymph, the cupula bends

o This stimulates hair cells to transmit signals to the vestibular nerve

• When you are moving at a constant rate, receptors stop sending impulses

• You no longer have the sensation of motion until you change speed or direction

Vision plays a significant role in balance. Approximately twenty percent of the nerve fibers from
the eyes interact with the vestibular system.
Taste and Smell – Chemical Receptors

Taste buds

• The mouth contains around 10,000 taste buds, most of which are located on and around the
tiny bumps on your tongue.

• Every taste bud detects five primary tastes:

o Sour

o Sweet

o Bitter

o Salty

o Umami - salts of certain acids (for example monosodium glutamate or MSG)

• Each of your taste buds contains 50-100 specialised receptor cells.

• Sticking out of every single one of these receptor cells is a tiny taste hair that checks out the
food chemicals in your saliva.

• When these taste hairs are stimulated, they send nerve impulses to your brain.

• Each taste hair responds best to one of the five basic tastes.

Smell Receptors or Olfactory receptors

• Humans able to detect thousands of different smells

• Olfactory receptors occupy a stamp-sized area in the roof of the nasal cavity, the hollow space
inside the nose
• Tiny hairs, made of nerve fibers, dangle from all your olfactory receptors. They are covered
with a layer of mucus.

• If a smell, formed by chemicals in the air, dissolves in this mucus, the hairs absorb it and excite
your olfactory receptors.

• A few molecules are enough to activate these extremely sensitive receptors.

• Olfactory Hairs easily fatigued so you do not notice smells

• Linked to memories - when your olfactory receptors are stimulated, they transmit impulses to
your brain and the pathway is directly connected to the limbic system - the part of your brain
that deals with emotions so you usually either like or dislike a smell

• Smells leave long-lasting impressions and are strongly linked to your memories

• Much of what we associate as taste also involves smell – that is why hot foods “taste”
different than “cold” foods.




Figure 33: Smell receptors
Self Assessment

  a). Highlight five types of sensory receptors

  b). Describe the process of hearing

  c). Highlight five common eye defects




  Responses

  a). Highlight five types of sensory receptors

  1. Mechanoreceptors - pressure receptors, stretch receptors, and specialized mechanoreceptors
  involved in movement and balance.

  2. Thermo receptors - skin and viscera, respond to both external and internal temperature

  3. Pain receptors - stimulated by lack of O2, chemicals released from damaged cells and
  inflammatory cells

  4. Chemoreceptors - detect changes in levels of O2, CO2, and H+ ions (pH) as well as
  chemicals that stimulate taste and smell receptors

  5. Photoreceptors - stimulated by light

  b). Describe the process of hearing

  Sound waves enter your outer ear and travel through your ear canal to the middle ear.

  • The ear canal channels the waves to your eardrum, a thin, sensitive membrane stretched tightly
  over the entrance to your middle ear.
• The waves cause your eardrum to vibrate.

• It passes these vibrations on to the hammer, one of three tiny bones in your ear. The hammer
vibrating causes the anvil, the small bone touching the hammer, to vibrate. The anvil passes
these vibrations to the stirrup, another small bone which touches the anvil. From the stirrup, the
vibrations pass into the inner ear.

• The stirrup touches a liquid filled sack and the vibrations travel into the cochlea, which is
shaped like a shell.

• Inside the cochlea, a vestibular system formed by three semicircular canals that are
approximately at right angles to each other and which are responsible for the sense of balance
and spatial orientation.

It has chambers filled with a viscous fluid and small particles (otoliths) containing calcium
carbonate. The movement of these particles over small hair cells in the inner ear sends signals
to the brain that are interpreted as motion and acceleration. The brain processes the information
from the ear and lets us distinguish between different types of sounds




c). Highlight five common eye defects

• Myopia or nearsightedness where the eyeball is too long or the cornea is too steep;

• Hyperopia or far sightedness where the eyeball is short or lens cannot become round enough:

• Presbyopia where the muscles controlling the bulging of the lens become weak as we age;

• Cataracts where the lens becomes fogged;

• Nyctalopia or night blindness where vision is impaired in dim light and in the dark due to
pigment rhodospin in the rods not functioning properly External features of the eye.

References
  Drake et al. (2010), Gray's Anatomy for Students, 2nd Ed., Churchill Livingstone.

  Carlson, Neil R. (2013). "6". Physiology of Behaviour (11th ed.). Upper Saddle River, New
  Jersey, USA: Pearson Education Inc. pp. 187–189. ISBN 978-0-205-23939-9.

  Margaret., Livingstone (2008). Vision and art : the biology of seeing. Hubel, David H. New
  York: Abrams. ISBN 9780810995543. OCLC 192082768.

  Schacter, Daniel L. et al.,["Psychology"],"Worth Publishers",2011

  Jan Schnupp; Israel Nelken; Andrew King (2011). Auditory Neuroscience. MIT Press. ISBN
  978-0-262-11318-2. Archived from the origin




Learning outcome 16: Demonstrate knowledge of the reproductive system and its functions

Introduction to learning outcome

  This learning outcome specifies the competencies required to identify Components of the human
  reproductive system, describe the structure and components as well as the fertilization process.

  Performance standard
     1. Components of the human reproductive system are identified
     2. Structure and functions of components are described
     3. Fertilization process is described

Information sheet

Function of the reproductive system

  Sexual reproduction requires a male and a female of the same species to copulate and combine
  their genes in order to produce a new individual who is genetically different from his parents.
  Sexual reproduction relies on meiosis to shuffle the genes , so that new combinations of genes
  occur in each generation , allowing some of the offspring of survive in the constantly – changing
  environment . The male reproductive system produces, sustains, and delivers sperm cells
  (spermatozoa) to the female reproductive tract. The female reproductive system produces,
  sustains , and allows egg cells (oocytes ) to be fertilized by sperm . It also supports the
  development of an offspring (gestation) and gives birth to a new individual (parturition) .

  Male Reproductive System

  Testis: Sex organ that produces sperm in a process called spermatogenesis, and male sex
  hormones (testosterone).

  Developed in a male fetus near the kidneys, and descend to the scrotum about 2 months before
  birth.

  Each testis is enclosed by a layer of fibrous connective tissue called tunica alumina.

  Each testis contains about 250 functional units called lobules; each lobule contains about 4
  seminiferous tubules where spermatogenesis occurs.

  All somniferous tubules in a testis converge and form a channel called rate testis.




Testis
Figure 33: The Testis




Scrotum: A pouch – like cutaneous extension that contains the two testes. Located outside of
pelvic cavity to prevent overheating of testes [internal temperature of scrotum is always about
3 ˚F below body temperature] .

Epididymis: An expanded tubule from the rate testis where sperm is stored (for about 3 days) ,
matured and become fully functional. Contains cilia on its columnar epithelium that help move
sperm toward vas deferens during ejaculation. .

Vas deferens: A tubule (about 10 inches long) that connects epididymis to the urethra for
transporting sperm during ejaculation. It contains smooth muscle that undergoes rapid peristalsis
during ejaculation.

Accessory sex glands

Seminal vesicles: secrete an alkaline solution that makes up 60% of the semen volume; this
seminal fluid contains fructose (nutrient for the sperm) and prostaglandins (substances that
stimulate uterine contraction during sexual excitation).
Prostate gland: secretes a slightly acidic, milky white fluid that makes up about 30% of semen
volume; this fluid helps neutralize the pH of semen and vaginal secretion.

Bulb urethral gland: secretes a clear lubricating fluid that aids in sexual intercourse.

Reproductive organs of the male




Figure 34

Urethra: a tubule located inside the penis for urine excretion and semen ejaculation .Contains
smooth muscle that performs rapid peristalsis during ejaculation .

Penis: a copulatory organ that is responsible for delivering the sperm to the female reproductive
tract. Contains 2 erectile tissues called corpus cavernosa and corpus spongiosum, where the
latter one enlarges and forms the glans penis due to increased blood flow during sexual
excitation.

During sexual excitement, parasympathetic nerves cause vasodilatation in the penis, allowing
erectile tissues to swell and erect the penis.
During ejaculation, sympathetic nerves cause vas deferens, urethra and erectile tissues to
contract, forcefully expelling semen (a mixture of sex gland fluids and about 300 million sperm)
outward.

Seminiferous Tubules

About 1,000 seminiferous tubules in each testis conduct spermatogenesis.

Between the tubules are specialized glandular cells called interstitial cells (or leydig's cells )
which produce testosterone.

Inside the tubules are specialized cells called sertoli's cells which support and nourish the sperm.




Spermatogenesis

Spermatogonia (containing 46 chromosomes) undergo DNA replication and produce primary
spermatocytes (with 46 pairs of chromosomes) .[some spermatozoid undergo mitosis to
maintain a large population , so that spermatogenesis can be continuous for many decades ].

Primary spermatocytes undergo "crossing - over" to shuffle their genes ,and undergo meiosis I
which results in secondary spermatocytes (each containing 46 unique chromosomes) .

Secondary spermatocytes undergo meiosis II which produces spermatids (with 23 unique
chromosomes).

Spermatids now transform themselves into spermatozoa (also containing 23 unique
chromosomes) in a final event called spermatogenesis.

Female reproductive system

Ovary:
Primary sex organ that produces egg cells in a process called oogenesis, and also produces
female sex hormones such as estrogens and progesterone.

Developed near the kidneys during fetal development, and toward the end of pregnancy descend
into the pelvic cavity.

Consists of ovarian cortex where the ovarian cycle occurs and ovarian medulla where scar
tissues and connective tissue are located.

Enclosed by a layer of cubical cells called germinal epithelium.

Bound to the uterine tubes and uterus by ovarian ligaments.

Figure 35: Internal reproductive organs of a female




Structure of an ovary
Figure 36




Uterine tube (or fallopian tube): consists of firmbriae, finger – like appendages that collect the
ovum from the ovary during ovulation.

Infundibulum channels the ovum from the firmbriae into the uterine tube.

Ampulla is the curvature of the uterine tube where most fertilization occurs.

Inner wall of uterine tube is made of ciliated mucosa, where the cilia propel the ovum toward
the uterus.

Uterus

A pear – shaped cavity formed by the union of the two uterine tubes .

Composed of 3 layers of tissue – perimetrium (fibrous connective tissue) , myometrium (smooth
muscle), and endometrium (epithelial and connective tissues) .

After fertilization, embryo adheres to the endometrial layer for further development – an event
called implantation.
To prepare for implantation and development, endometrium is stimulated by estrogens to
thicken and becomes vascularzed – a process called the menstrual cycle.

Myometrium, under the stimulation of oxytocin, contracts during labor to expel the fetus into
the vagina.

The base of uterus is closed by a narrow passageway called cervix to prevent the entry of foreign
substances.

Vagina: an elastic channel inferior to the cervix that serves as the "birth canal" during
parturition. Also serves as the copulatory receptacle , where it receives the penis during sexual
intercourse. In addition to the acids secretion from cervix, it also coveys uterine secretions (i.e.
menstrual flow).




Oogenesis

In the ovarian cortex, a process called oogenesis (formation of egg) occurs to develop a mature
ovum. Before birth , several million cells called primordial oocytes exist in the ovaries – most
of them spontaneously degenerate .

At birth, only 1 million primordial oocytes are left ; and by puberty (age 10-11) ,only 400,000
remain in the ovaries .

From puberty to menopause, some of these primordial oocytes (containing 46 chromosomes)
undergo DNA replication and become primary oocytes (with 46 pairs of chromosomes).

Primary oocytes will then undergo "crossing - over" to shuffle their genes, and meiosis I will
occur to divide the cells into secondary oocytes (containing 46 unique chromosomes) and the
first polar bodies (also containing 46 unique chromosomes ; but will be degenerated).
Oogenesis now is arrested where Events of oogenesis the ovary discharges a mature secondary
oocyte into the uterine tube (in a process called ovulation) .

Meiosis II is reactivated when this secondary oocyte is fertilized by a sperm (if no fertilization
occurs, secondary oocyte is discarded along with the menstrual flow), instantly dividing the 46
chromosomes into 23 (inside the second polar body) and another 23 will be united with the 23
chromosomes released from the sperm.

Mechanism of erection, lubrication, and orgasm in human female

1. Sexual stimulation.

2. Arteries in the erectile tissue dilate, vagina expands and elongates

3. Engorged and swollen vagina increases friction from movement of penis.

4. Parasympathetic nerves impulses from sacral portion of the spinal nerve is enhanced.

5. Sexual stimulation intensifies.

6. Vestibule glands secrete mucus to lubricate.

7. Orgasm: rhythmic contraction of muscles of the perineum, muscular walls of uterus, and
uterine tube.

Hormonal control of reproductive function

Hormones from the hypothalamus,

Anterior Pituitary gland and ovaries, play important roles in the control of sex cell maturation,
and development and maintenance of female secondary sex characteristics.

Female sex hormones:

A female body remains reproductively immature until about 10 years of age when gonadotropin
secretion increases.
The most important female sex hormones are estrogen and progesterone.

Estrogen is responsible for the development and maintenance of most female secondary sex
characteristics.

Progesterone causes change in the uterus.

Hormonal control of secondary sex characteristic

The hypothalamus releases GnRH, which stimulates the Ant. Pituitary gland.

The Ant. pituitary gland secretes FSH and LH.

FSH stimulates the maturation of a follicle.

Granulose cells of the follicle produce and secrete estrogen; LH stimulated certain cells to
secrete estrogen precursor molecules.

Estrogen is responsible for the development and maintenance of most female secondary sex
characteristics.

Concentration of Androgens affects other secondary sex characteristics, including skeletal
growth and growth of hair.

Progesterone, secreted by the ovaries, affect cyclical changes in the uterus and mammary glands.

Ovarian cycle

A series of event in the ovarian cortex in order to produce a mature ovum and sex hormones.

Lasts for about 28 days, where from day 1 to 13 the mature ovum is developed and estrogens
are released, on day 14 ovulation occurs to discharge the ovum , and from day 15 to 28 scar
tissues are formed and progesterone is released . On day 1, hypothalamus secretes Latinizing
hormone releasing hormone (LHRH) to the anterior pituitary gland, which in turn secretes
follicle – stimulating hormone (FSH) to the ovaries. Upon receiving FSH, about 20-25 primary
follicles develop into secondary follicles. (Primary oocytes located inside primary follicles
undergo meiosis I and become secondary oocoytes, contained in secondary follicles).

Follicular cells in secondary follicles begin to secrete estrogens (for communicating with
hypothalamus and anterior pituitary and for developing the endometrium) .

With continuous stimulation of FSH and some Latinizing hormone (LH) ,secondary follicles
continue to grow larger and develop multiple layers of follicular cells (while the secondary
oocytes within are unchanged).

By day 13 , only 1 secondary follicle will fully mature and become the graafian follicle (or
mature follicle) which secretes a large amount of estrogens to the hypothalamus – anterior
pituitary system for signaling ovulation (using a positive feedback mechanism).

On day 14 , large amounts of LH ("LH surge") will be secreted by anterior pituitary , inducing
ovulation where the graafian follicle ruptures and releases the secondary oocyte into uterine tube
.

From days 15 to 25 , graafian follicle degenerates and becomes corpus hemorrhagicum ("a
bleeding body") then corpus luteum ("a yellow body"; containing lutein cells that secrete
progesterone and some estrogens to continuum stimulating the development of endometrium).

By day 26 , if no fertilization occurs to the secondary oocyte, resulting in a lack of human
chorionic Gonadotropin hormone (HCG) from the embryo , corpus luteum degenerates into
corpus albicans . [if fertilization did occur , HCG will continuously simulate corpus luteum for
2-3 months , allowing high levels of estrogens and progesterone to maintain pregnancy in the
first trimester] .

When corpus luteum degenerates, the declining levels of estrogens and progesterone will signal
the hypothalamus – anterior pituitary system to initiate another ovarian cycle.




Fertilization
Fertilization, union of a sperm nucleus, of paternal origin, with an egg nucleus, of maternal
origin, to form the primary nucleus of an embryo. In all organisms the essence of fertilization
is, in fact, the fusion of the hereditary material of two different sex cells, or gametes, each of
which carries half the number of chromosomes typical of the species. The most primitive form
of fertilization, found in microorganisms and protozoans, consists of an exchange of genetic
material between two cells.

The first significant event in fertilization is the fusion of the membranes of the two gametes,
resulting in the formation of a channel that allows the passage of material from one cell to the
other. Fertilization in advanced plants is preceded by pollination, during which pollen is
transferred to, and establishes contact with, the female gamete or macrospore. Fusion in
advanced animals is usually followed by penetration of the egg by a single spermatozoon. The
result of fertilization is a cell (zygote) capable of undergoing cell division to form a new
individual.

The fusion of two gametes initiates several reactions in the egg. One of these causes a change in
the egg membrane(s), so that the attachment of and penetration by more than one spermatozoon
cannot occur. In species in which more than one spermatozoon normally enters an egg
(polyspermy), only one spermatozoal nucleus actually merges with the egg nucleus. The most
important result of fertilization is egg activation, which allows the egg to undergo cell division.
Activation, however, does not necessarily require the intervention of a spermatozoon; during
parthenogenesis, in which fertilization does not occur, activation of an egg may be accomplished
through the intervention of physical and chemical agents. Invertebrates such as aphids, bees,
and rotifers normally reproduce by parthenogenesis.

Maturation Of The Egg

Maturation is the final step in the production of functional eggs (oogenesis) that can associate
with a spermatozoon and develop a reaction that prevents the entry of more than one
spermatozoon. In addition, the cytoplasm of a mature egg can support the changes that lead to
fusion of spermatozoal and egg nuclei and initiate embryonic development.

Egg surface
Certain components of an egg’s surface, especially the cortical granules, are associated with a
mature condition. Cortical granules of sea urchin eggs, aligned beneath the plasma membrane
(thin, soft, pliable layer) of mature eggs, have a diameter of 0.8–1.0 micron (0.0008–0.001
millimetre) and are surrounded by a membrane similar in structure to the plasma membrane
surrounding the egg. Cortical granules are formed in a cell component known as a Golgi
complex, from which they migrate to the surface of the maturing egg.

The surface of a sea urchin egg has the ability to affect the passage of light unequally in different
directions; this property, called birefringence, is an indication that the molecules comprising the
surface layers are arranged in a definite way. Since birefringence appears as an egg matures, it
is likely that the properties of a mature egg membrane are associated with specific molecular
arrangements. A mature egg is able to support the formation of a zygote nucleus; i.e., the result
of fusion of spermatozoal and egg nuclei. In most eggs the process of reduction of chromosomal
number (meiosis) is not completed prior to fertilization. In such cases the fertilizing
spermatozoon remains beneath the egg surface until meiosis in the egg has been completed, after
which changes and movements that lead to fusion and the formation of a zygote occur.

Egg coats

The surfaces of most animal eggs are surrounded by envelopes, which may be soft gelatinous
coats (as in echinoderms and some amphibians) or thick membranes (as in fishes, insects, and
mammals). In order to reach the egg surface, therefore, spermatozoa must penetrate these
envelopes; indeed, spermatozoa contain enzymes (organic catalysts) that break them down. In
some cases (e.g., fishes and insects) there is a channel, or micropyle, in the envelope, through
which a spermatozoon can reach the egg.

The jelly coats of echinoderm and amphibian eggs consist of complex carbohydrates called
sulfated mucopolysaccharides. The envelope of a mammalian egg is more complex. The egg is
surrounded by a thick coat composed of a carbohydrate protein complex called zona pellucida.
The zona is surrounded by an outer envelope, the corona radiata, which is many cell layers thick
and formed by follicle cells adhering to the oocyte before it leaves the ovarian follicle.
Although it once was postulated that the jelly coat of an echinoderm egg contains a substance
(fertilizin) thought to have an important role not only in the establishment of sperm-egg
interaction but also in egg activation, fertilizin now has been shown identical with jelly-coat
material, rather than a substance continuously secreted from it. Yet there is evidence that the
egg envelopes do play a role in fertilization; i.e., contact with the egg coat elicits the acrosome
reaction (described below) in spermatozoa.

Events of Fertilization

Sperm-egg association

The acrosome reaction of spermatozoa is a prerequisite for the association between a
spermatozoon and an egg, which occurs through fusion of their plasma membranes. After a
spermatozoon comes in contact with an egg, the acrosome, which is a prominence at the anterior
tip of the spermatozoa, undergoes a series of well-defined structural changes. A structure within
the acrosome, called the acrosomal vesicle, bursts, and the plasma membrane surrounding the
spermatozoon fuses at the acrosomal tip with the membrane surrounding the acrosomal vesicle
to form an opening. As the opening is formed, the acrosomal granule, which is enclosed within
the acrosomal vesicle, disappears. The dissolution of the granule releases a substance called a
lysin, which breaks down the egg’s vitelline coat, allowing passage of the spermatozoon to the
egg. The acrosomal membrane region opposite the opening adheres to the nuclear envelope of
the spermatozoon and forms a shallow out pocketing, which rapidly elongates into a thin tube,
the acrosomal tubule that extends to the egg surface and fuses with the egg plasma membrane.
The tubule thus formed establishes continuity between the egg and the spermatozoon and
provides a way for the spermatozoal nucleus to reach the interior of the egg. Other spermatozoal
structures that may be carried within the egg include the midpiece and part of the tail; the
spermatozoal plasma membrane and the acrosomal membrane, however, do not reach the
interior of the egg. In fact, whole spermatozoa injected into unfertilized eggs cannot elicit the
activation reaction or merge with the egg nucleus. As the spermatozoal nucleus is drawn within
the egg, the spermatozoal plasma membrane breaks down; at the end of the process, the
continuity of the egg plasma membrane is re-established. This description of the process of
sperm-egg association, first documented for the acorn worm Saccoglossus (phylum
Enteropneusta), generally applies to most eggs studied thus far.




Figure 37:

During their passage through the female genital tract of mammals, spermatozoa undergo
physiological change, called capacitation, which is a prerequisite for their participation in
fertilization; they are able to undergo the acrosome reaction, traverse the egg envelopes, and
reach the interior of the egg. Dispersal of cells in the outer egg envelope (corona radiata) is
caused by the action of an enzyme (hyaluronidase) that breaks down a substance (hyaluronic
acid) binding corona radiata cells together. The enzyme may be contained in the acrosome and
released as a result of the acrosome reaction, during passage of the spermatozoon through the
corona radiata. The reaction is well advanced by the time a spermatozoon contacts the thick coat
surrounding the egg itself (zona pellucida). The pathway of a spermatozoon through the zona
pellucida appears to be an oblique slit created by the oscillation of the sperm’s head near the
point of its attachment to the zona pellucida.

Association of a mammalian spermatozoon with the egg surface occurs along the lateral surface
of the spermatozoon, rather than at the tip as in other animals, so that the spermatozoon lies flat
on the egg surface. Several points of fusion occur between the plasma membranes of the two
gametes (i.e., the breakdown of membranes occurs by formation of numerous small vesicles).

Specificity of sperm-egg interaction

Fertilization is strictly species-specific, and the egg’s coating, the zona pellucida, plays an
important role in the binding process between sperm and egg. In general, the biochemistry of
the zona pellucida of one species differs from that of another, and thus it only matches up and
binds with sperm of the appropriate species. For example, among the echinoderms, solutions of
the jelly coat clump, or agglutinate, only spermatozoa of their own species. In both echinoderms
and amphibians, however, slight damage to an egg surface makes fertilization possible with
spermatozoa of different species (heterologous fertilization); this procedure has been used to
obtain certain hybrid larvae. In addition, binding between sperm and egg of different species
may occur when the zona pellucida of the egg is removed.

The eggs of ascidians, or sea squirts, members of the chordate subphylum Tunicata, are covered
with a thick membrane called a chorion. The space between the chorion and the egg is filled
with cells called test cells. The gametes of ascidians, which have both male and female
reproductive organs in one animal, mature at the same time, yet self-fertilization does not occur.
If the chorion and the test cells are removed, however, not only is fertilization with spermatozoa
of different species possible, but self-fertilization also can occur.

Prevention of polyspermy

Most animal eggs are monospermic; i.e., only one spermatozoon is admitted into an egg. In
some eggs, protection against the penetration of the egg by more than one spermatozoon
(polyspermy) is due to some property of the egg surface; in others, however, the egg envelopes
are responsible. The ability of some eggs to develop a polyspermy-preventing reaction depends
on a molecular rearrangement of the egg surface that occurs during egg maturation (oogenesis).
Although immature sea urchin eggs have the ability to associate with spermatozoa, they also
allow multiple penetration; i.e., they are unable to develop a polyspermy-preventing reaction.
Since the mature eggs of most animals are fertilized before completion of meiosis and are able
to develop a polyspermy-preventing reaction, specific properties of the egg surface must have
differentiated by the time meiosis stops, which is when the egg is ready to be fertilized.

In some mammalian eggs defense against polyspermy depends on properties of the zona
pellucida; i.e., when a spermatozoon has started to move through the zona, it does not allow the
penetration of additional spermatozoa (zona reaction). In other mammals, however, the zona
reaction either does not take place or is weak, as indicated by the presence of numerous
spermatozoa in the space between the zona and egg surface. In such cases the polyspermy-
preventing reaction resides in the egg surface. Although the eggs of some kinds of animals (e.g.,
some amphibians, birds, reptiles, and sharks) are naturally polyspermic, only one spermatozoal
nucleus fuses with an egg nucleus to form a zygote nucleus; all of the other spermatozoa
degenerate.

Formation of the fertilization membrane

The most spectacular changes that follow fertilization occur at the egg surface. The best known
example, that of the sea urchin egg, is described below. An immediate response to fertilization
is the raising of a membrane, called a vitelline membrane, from the egg surface. In the beginning
the membrane is very thin; soon, however, it thickens, develops a well-organized molecular
structure, and is called the fertilization membrane. At the same time an extensive rearrangement
of the molecular structure of the egg surface occurs. The events leading to formation of the
fertilization membrane require about one minute.

At the point on the outer surface of the sea urchin egg at which a spermatozoan attaches, the thin
vitelline membrane becomes detached. As a result the membranes of the cortical granules come
into contact with the inner aspect of the egg’s plasma membrane and fuse with it, the granules
open, and their contents are extruded into the perivitelline space; i.e., the space between the egg
surface and the raised vitelline membrane. Part of the contents of the granules merge with the
vitelline membrane to form the fertilization membrane; if fusion of the contents of the cortical
granules with the vitelline membrane is prevented, the membrane remains thin and soft. Another
material that also derives from the cortical granules covers the surface of the egg to form a
transparent layer, called the hyaline layer, which plays an important role in holding together the
cells (blastomeres) formed during division, or cleavage, of the egg. The plasma membrane
surrounding a fertilized egg, therefore, is a mosaic structure containing patches of the original
plasma membrane of the unfertilized egg and areas derived from membranes of the cortical
granules. The events leading to the formation of the fertilization membrane are accompanied by
a change of the electric charge across the plasma membrane, referred to as the fertilization
potential, and a concurrent outflow of potassium ions (charged particles); both of these
phenomena are similar to those that occur in a stimulated nerve fibre. Another effect of
fertilization on the plasma membrane of the egg is a several-fold increase in its permeability to
various molecules. This change may be the result of the activation of some surface-located
membrane transport mechanism.

Formation of the zygote nucleus

After its entry into the egg cytoplasm, the spermatozoal nucleus, now called the male
pronucleus, begins to swell, and its chromosomal material disperses and becomes similar in
appearance to that of the female pronucleus. Although the membranous envelope surrounding
the male pronucleus rapidly disintegrates in the egg, a new envelope promptly forms around it.
The male pronucleus, which rotates 180° and moves towards the egg nucleus, initially is
accompanied by two structures (centrioles) that function in cell division. After the male and
female pronuclei have come into contact, the spermatozoal centrioles give rise to the first
cleavage spindle, which precedes division of the fertilized egg. In some cases fusion of the two
pronuclei may occur by a process of membrane fusion; in this process, two adjoining membranes
fuse at the point of contact to give rise to the continuous nuclear envelope that surrounds the
zygote nucleus.

Self Assessment

a). Describe formation of the zygote nucleus
b). Highlight the specificity of sperm egg intergration

c). Describe the ovarian cycle




Responses

a). Describe formation of the zygote nucleus

After its entry into the egg cytoplasm, the spermatozoal nucleus, now called the male
pronucleus, begins to swell, and its chromosomal material disperses and becomes similar in
appearance to that of the female pronucleus. Although the membranous envelope surrounding
the male pronucleus rapidly disintegrates in the egg, a new envelope promptly forms around it.
The male pronucleus, which rotates 180° and moves towards the egg nucleus, initially is
accompanied by two structures (centrioles) that function in cell division. After the male and
female pronuclei have come into contact, the spermatozoal centrioles give rise to the first
cleavage spindle, which precedes division of the fertilized egg. In some cases fusion of the two
pronuclei may occur by a process of membrane fusion; in this process, two adjoining membranes
fuse at the point of contact to give rise to the continuous nuclear envelope that surrounds the
zygote nucleus.




b). Highlight the specificity of sperm egg integration

Fertilization is strictly species-specific, and the egg’s coating, the zona pellucida, plays an
important role in the binding process between sperm and egg. In general, the biochemistry of
the zona pellucida of one species differs from that of another, and thus it only matches up and
binds with sperm of the appropriate species. For example, among the echinoderms, solutions of
the jelly coat clump, or agglutinate, only spermatozoa of their own species. In both echinoderms
and amphibians, however, slight damage to an egg surface makes fertilization possible with
spermatozoa of different species (heterologous fertilization); this procedure has been used to
obtain certain hybrid larvae. In addition, binding between sperm and egg of different species
may occur when the zona pellucida of the egg is removed.

The eggs of ascidians, or sea squirts, members of the chordate subphylum Tunicata, are covered
with a thick membrane called a chorion. The space between the chorion and the egg is filled
with cells called test cells. The gametes of ascidians, which have both male and female
reproductive organs in one animal, mature at the same time, yet self-fertilization does not occur.
If the chorion and the test cells are removed, however, not only is fertilization with spermatozoa
of different species possible, but self-fertilization also can occur.




c). Describe the ovarian cycle

A series of event in the ovarian cortex in order to produce a mature ovum and sex hormones.

Lasts for about 28 days, where from day 1 to 13 the mature ovum is developed and estrogens
are released, on day 14 ovulation occurs to discharge the ovum , and from day 15 to 28 scar
tissues are formed and progesterone is released . On day 1, hypothalamus secretes Latinizing
hormone releasing hormone (LHRH) to the anterior pituitary gland, which in turn secretes
follicle – stimulating hormone (FSH) to the ovaries. Upon receiving FSH, about 20-25 primary
follicles develop into secondary follicles. (Primary oocytes located inside primary follicles
undergo meiosis I and become secondary oocoytes, contained in secondary follicles).

Follicular cells in secondary follicles begin to secrete estrogens (for communicating with
hypothalamus and anterior pituitary and for developing the endometrium) .

With continuous stimulation of FSH and some Latinizing hormone (LH) ,secondary follicles
continue to grow larger and develop multiple layers of follicular cells (while the secondary
oocytes within are unchanged).

By day 13 , only 1 secondary follicle will fully mature and become the graafian follicle (or
mature follicle) which secretes a large amount of estrogens to the hypothalamus – anterior
pituitary system for signaling ovulation (using a positive feedback mechanism).
On day 14 , large amounts of LH ("LH surge") will be secreted by anterior pituitary , inducing
ovulation where the graafian follicle ruptures and releases the secondary oocyte into uterine tube
.

From days 15 to 25 , graafian follicle degenerates and becomes corpus hemorrhagicum ("a
bleeding body") then corpus luteum ("a yellow body"; containing lutein cells that secrete
progesterone and some estrogens to continuum stimulating the development of endometrium).

By day 26 , if no fertilization occurs to the secondary oocyte, resulting in a lack of human
chorionic Gonadotropin hormone (HCG) from the embryo , corpus luteum degenerates into
corpus albicans . [if fertilization did occur , HCG will continuously simulate corpus luteum for
2-3 months , allowing high levels of estrogens and progesterone to maintain pregnancy in the
first trimester] .

When corpus luteum degenerates, the declining levels of estrogens and progesterone will signal
the hypothalamus – anterior pituitary system to initiate another ovarian cycle.




References

Introduction to the Reproductive System, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) Program.
Archived October 24, 2007, at the Wayback Machine

^ Reproductive System 2001 Body Guide powered by Adam

^ STD's Today National Prevention Network, Center for Disease Control, United States
Government, retrieving 2007

^ Sexual Reproduction in Humans. 2006. John W. Kimball. Kimball's Biology Pages, and online
textbook.

^ Schultz, Nicholas G., et al. "The baculum was gained and lost multiple times during
mammalian evolution." Integrative and comparative biology 56.4 (2016): 644-656.
  ^ Werdelin L, Nilsonne A (January 1999). "The evolution of the scrotum and testicular descent
  in mammals: a phylogenetic view". J. Theor. Biol. 196 (1): 61–72. doi:10.1006/jtbi.1998.0821




                                         CHAPTER TWO
                             BASIC HOSPITAL PROCEDURES

  UNIT CODE: HE/CU/TT/CC/02/6/A

  Related Unit of Competency in Occupational Standard: Apply basic hospital procedure

  Introduction to the unit of learning

  This unit specifies the competencies required to apply basic hospital procedures. It involves
  demonstrating the knowledge of a health facility set up, medical equipment in basic patient care
  identifying elements of total-patient-care and applying basic patient care procedures.
  Summary of Learning Outcomes
     1. Demonstrate the knowledge of a health facility set up
     2. Demonstrate the knowledge of medical equipment in basic patient care
     3. Identify elements of total-patient-care
     4. Apply basic patient care procedures

Learning outcome 1: Demonstrate the knowledge of a health facility set up
Introduction to the learning outcome
  This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to demonstrate the
  knowledge of a health facility set up. It comprises meaning of terms, types of departments in a
  health facility, Management structure and ministerial organogram, levels of health facilities,
  theatre layout, units in a theatre learning activities, self-assessment questions and answers,
  learning activities, tools, equipment, supplies and materials and references.

  Performance Standard

      1. Existing departments in a health facility are identified as per the institution’s policy
      2. Management structure is identified as per the MoH organogram
      3. Service charter is identified as per the institutional framework
      4. Theatre layout is described as per WHO standards

  Information Sheet

  Meaning of terms

  A health facility is, in general, any location where healthcare is provided. They include
  hospitals, clinics, outpatient care centers, and specialized care centers, such as birthing centers
  and psychiatric care centers.

  Healthcare facility means an office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases,
  whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical, physiological, or psychological
  conditions, including but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics,
  including weight control clinics, nursing homes, long-term care facilities, homes for the aging
  or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists,
  physicians, psychiatrists, dentists, and all specialists within these professions. This definition
  shall include all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within
  health care facilities.

  A medical procedure is a course of action intended to achieve a result in the delivery of
  healthcare.
Medical test is a procedure with the intention of determining, measuring, or diagnosing a patient
condition or parameter.

Management structure and ministerial organogram

Hospitals require precision in the execution of job responsibilities and multiple layers of
accountability in order to function. To accomplish this, hospitals use a vertical organizational
structure with many layers of management.

Understanding hospital organizational structure ensures that hospital employees know their own
responsibilities, the responsibilities of those around them, to whom they report and who to talk
to about particular responsibilities or fields of knowledge.

The Organizational Structure of Hospitals

Board

All hospitals include some form of governing body responsible for making high-level decisions
about the organization. A hospital’s board of directors is often drawn from the healthcare
community and is made up of experts in their respective fields. Religiously affiliated hospitals
often include clergy on their boards of directors. Teaching hospitals often include university
faculty from the medical school with which they’re affiliated.

Executives

Hospital executives are responsible for managing the organization, making financial decisions
and overseeing business strategy. Medical and health services managers may oversee entire
practices or clinical areas. A hospital typically has a chief financial officer who tends to the
financial health of the business and a chief operating officer or chief executive officer
responsible for high level business strategy and decision making.

Department Administrators
Department administrators report to the hospital executives and manage the day-to-day
operations of specific departments within a hospital. The chief of surgery, for example, is
responsible for overseeing daily activities within the surgical department as well as performing
surgery. A chief of surgery might engage in public relations activities, fundraising and
recruitment. Non-medical departments within a hospital, such as food services or switchboard
personnel, also have department administrators.

Patient Care Managers

Nurse managers and supervising physicians are both patient care managers. These individuals
manage small groups of professionals who provide direct patient care. They ensure that orders
are carried out, that hospital employees are fulfilling their duties appropriately and that
employees are complying with legal requirements.

Service Providers

The vast majority of hospital workers are service providers: doctors, nurses, orderlies, physical
therapists, laundry workers and the many other people required in order for a hospital to
function. They provide patient care, maintain records and ensure that the hospital is able to
deliver care to patients in an effective manner.
Figure 1: Organizational chart of Ministry of Health structure
Source:       https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Organizational-chart-of-Ministry-of-Health-
structure_fig10_237624652




Figure 2: Generic organogram of district hospitals in Kenya. *Medical officers here refer to
physicians while clinical officers are “non-physician” clinicians as described in 16

Source:       https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Generic-organogram-of-district-hospitals-in-
Kenya-Medical-officers-here-refer-to_fig1_235739577

Types of departments in a health facility

Departments in Hospital
There are several departments are found in hospitals namely Outpatient department (OPD),
Inpatient Service (IP), Medical Department, Nursing Department, Paramedical Department,
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Department, Operation Theatre Complex (OT), Pharmacy
Department, Radiology Department (X-ray), Dietary Department, Non-professional Services
(Business Management), Medical Record Department (MRD) and Personnel Department.

Outpatient Department (OPD)




Most hospitals now have an OPD. The advantage of OPD is that much of the investigative unit
and curative work can be done there without admitting the client, thus curtailing medical
expenses.




The scope of OPD includes the following:

Consultation, investigation, procedures, specialty services.

Preventive and promotive health care: Clinics, which include: diabetic, antenatal, postnasal and
under five.

Rehabilitation services (physiotherapy, occupational therapy etc)

Health education

Counseling

Inpatient Service (IP)

If OPD is the show window of the hospital, the IP is the heart of the hospital. The IP service
provides lodging, diet and medical care. Conveniently, it can be divided into:

Wards and rooms
Nurses station

Dietary services

Sanitary facilities and other requirements




Medical department

The medical department has within it the various clinical services. They are: medicine, surgery,
gynaecology, obstetrics, paediatrics, eye, ENT, dental, orthopaedics, neurology, cardiology,
psychiatry, skin, V.D., plastic surgery, nuclear medicine, infectious disease etc. medical
superintendent is a doctor who has control over all medical department.




Nursing department

The nursing department is the organizational structure through which nurses provide nursing
care for clients under the jurisdiction of the institution. The nursing department consists of
nursing service and nursing education. The primary purpose of the nursing service is to provide
comprehensive, safe, effective and well-organized nursing care through the personnel of the
department. The personnel consists of nursing superintendent, assistant nursing superintendents,
head nurses and staff nurses. All of these are registered nurses, other personnel who function in
the nursing service department may include the auxiliary personnel nurse aids and domestics
who handle the non-nursing services.

The nursing education section has the responsibility of preparing nursing students to become
professional nurses. Uplifting the standard of nursing by inservice education and refresher
courses etc., are included in the functions of this department. The personnel consists of principal
or director of nursing education, the associate professors, assistant professors, tutors and clinical
instructors.
Pharmacy Department

Pharmacy is a crucial factor in medical factor. It should be planned and organized well. The
pharmacy department has the responsibility for selecting purchasing, compounding, storing and
dispensing all drugs and medications. The pharmacy should be under the supervision of a
registered pharmacist.

Radiology Department (X-ray Department)

The department must be located in a place where there is easy accessibility for OP and IP clients.
Of the total space, the distribution for various rooms is as follows:

X-ray rooms: 25%

Film processing: 10%

Administration: 30%

Waiting area: 5%

Circulation area: 30%

Sufficient number of staff should be available. Staff must be protected against radiation hazards.

This department has the following services.

Radiographic examinations and their interpretations

X-ray, radium, radioactive cobalt and other radioactive therapy

Ultrasonography, Echocardiogram, C.T. Scan, MRI and ECG.

Dietary Department
The dietary department has the responsibility for the food service to the client according to their
needs and doctor’s prescription. This department is responsible for the health teaching in regard
to proper diet of the client upon their discharge from the hospital.

Non-Professional Services (Business Management)

Admitting Department

The admitting department has the responsibility for admitting the client to the hospital. The
importance of this       department    lies   in   the public relation     that is    maintained.
The client, his family and his friends must be treated with utmost respect, courtesy and tact. The
enquiries made about the hospital and other clients are to be answered appropriately.

Administration

The administration of the entire hospital cannot be vested on the administrator alone. It is a
collective responsibility of a group of people. The administrative staff, depending upon the size
of the hospital, is composed of the administrator, the assistant administrator, the business
manager and the departmental heads.

Purchasing Department

The purchasing department has the responsibility for purchasing all supplies and equipments for
the hospital.

Accounts (Business Office)

This department has the responsibility for collecting the money which is owed to the hospital,
paying for the supplies and equipment, handling all records pertaining to hospital finance,
keeping records of assets and liabilities and assisting with budget. The business manager is
responsible for the functions of the department. The accountants help him.

Housekeeping

The housekeeping department has one main function – to keep the hospital clean.
Laundry

The laundry takes care of the entire team linen of the hospital. It has the following functions:

Washing the dirty linen

Repairing the torn linen

Replacing the condemned linen

Mechanical Department

Electricity, water supply, heat, air-conditioning etc., are looked after by the mechanical
department.

Maintenance Department

The maintenance department keeps the hospital in a good state of repair. Carpenters, painters,
welders, gardeners etc., are included in the personnel of this department.




Central Supply Department

The purpose of the central supply department is to prepare and furnish other departments with
equipment and supplies needed in the client care e.g. syringes, needles, treatment trays.

Social Service

The social service department assists in obtaining financial aid for clients and their families.
This department services also as a liaison between the client and community agencies.

Pastoral Care

Under the leadership of the chaplain, the pastoral care team meets the spiritual needs of the
client.
Some departments function as a part of other departments already mentioned, e.g., the operating
room functions as part of the department of surgery. The outpatient department is a combination
of several departments. The emergency room functions along with the department of medicine.
Sometimes according to the load of client care, the services may be given in special department
such as intensive care, immediate care, and ambulatory care units.

Hospital Waste Management

It is newly set department which takes care of the disposal of the entire waste both solid and
liquid.

Central Sterile Supply Department (CSSD)

This is important department which supplies sterile articles throughout the hospital. CSSD
handles contaminated, clean and sterile articles.

Work flow in CSSD: Receiving – Washing – Drying – Accounting – Sorting – Packing –
Sterilization – Sterile storage – Issue. The articles should move in one direction from receipt to
issue. The location should be such that the wards and departments can have easy access.
Medical Record Department (MRD)

This is an integral part of every modern hospital. The guiding principle is “people forget, records
remember.” Functionally the MRD is divided into

(1) Reception

(2) Medical Records Library

(3) Statistical Section.

Weeding out of clients file, is done in successive years:

OP Records: 5 years.

IP Records: 10 years.
Medicolegal Records: 15 years.

Now with computerization the files can be entered into the computer and can be utilized when
required.
Every health care facility should have arrangement for handling medicolegal cases. The hospital
administration, as well as the doctors, nurses and other staff members should be made aware of
the legal implications involved in the client’s care, so that lot of problems can be avoided.

Personnel Department

This department in the hospital must be well versed with law of the land especially the labour
laws and is responsible for recruitment, selection, promotion, transfer, termination etc. The
personnel department functions under the personnel officer who is qualified in the personnel
administration. The personnel department has the following functions, directed to the welfare
of the personnel.

Recruitment of personnel

Interviewing prospective employees

Promotion and transfer of employees

Termination of employment

Inservice training programme

Remuneration and incentives

Safety

Health programme

Recreation

Paramedical departments
Paramedical departments are adjunctive to the practice of medicine in the maintenance or
restoration of health and normal functioning.

They include:

Pathology Department

The following laboratories are usually found in the pathology department:

Bacteriology laboratory: This laboratory studies about the bacteria and their toxins.

Biochemistry: this is concerned with the chemistry of living organisms and of vital process.

Haematology laboratory: it is responsible for making haemoglobin determinations, coagulation
time studies, red and white cell counts and special blood pathology studies for anaemia and
leukaemia etc.

Parasitology laboratory: it studies the presence of parasites, the cyst and ovas of the parasites
that are found in the faeces.

Serology laboratory: it does blood agglutination tests, Wassermann tests, V.D.R.L. etc.

Blood bank: it has the responsibility for collecting and processing all blood used in the hospital
for transfusions. It makes studies on newborn infants who may have haemolytic diseases and
does antibody studies on the prenatal client.

Histopathology department: it prepares tissues for gross and microscopic studies.

Laboratory services (LAB) must be available day and night. Must be located on the ground floor
and should be easily accessible to the outpatients. Space requirement of Lab is:

Primary space: Required for technical work.

Secondary space: space utilized for administrative purpose.

Circulation space: for unchattered movement of personnel and equipment.
There should be sufficient staff and work arrangement for the efficient functioning of the
department.

Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Department

This department deals with clients who have functional disabilities resulting from disease
conditions/injuries. This department can have physiotherapy, occupational therapy, speech
therapy and vocational training. This department will be under the direction of a well – qualified
physician who has special training in the field of physical medicine and rehabilitation. His staff
should include therapists with qualification in the various specialties.

Operation Theatre Complex (OT)

This consists of one or more operation theatres and other facilities. OT complex must be located
in a place where there is easy and quick access to the delivery suite. These should be four zone
– outer zone, clean zone, sterile zone, disposal zone. There should be a sterilization room with
an autoclave. The number of OT depends on many factors. There should be an arrangement for
good lighting and ventilation.

Delivery suite is the place where births take place. The delivery suite is divided into three zones
are first stage room, second stage room, delivery room. The room should have good lighting and
ventilation. It should have adequate number of staff.

Levels of health facilities

Kenya’s Health sector is one of the 14 devolved functions managed by the 47 county
governments as provided in the Fourth Schedule of the 2010 Constitution.

County health facilities and pharmacies, ambulance services, promoting primary health care,
licensing and controlling facilities that sell food to the public and veterinary services are some
of the health-related roles the 47 counties manage. County health facilities and services include
county referral hospitals, sub-county health facilities, environmental health services,
communicable disease control, nutrition, family planning, maternal and child health plus Health
Education.
There are six different levels of health care facilities. The first five are managed on the county
level, the sixth level by the national government. In this system the patients may move from one
level to the next by using a referral letter.

LEVEL 1 – Community Facilities

They are run by certified medical clinical officers.

Some of the services:
    1. Treatment of minor ailments like diarrhoea
    2. Tuberculosis (TB) screening, home visits, contact tracing of TB patients and tracing of
        TB defaulters
    3. Screening of malnutrition
    4. Malaria rapid test
    5. Blood pressure and blood sugar testing
    6. HIV testing
    7. Health talks with pregnant women and observations of signs of danger
    8. Issuance of referral letters to other facilities

LEVEL 2 – Health Dispensaries

These facilities are run by clinical officers:

The dispensaries in the cities act like a health centre (see level 3), with the difference that the
dispensary does not have in-patient facilities.

These are some of the services you will expect in a dispensary:

    1. Outpatient services
    2. VCT services
    3. Tuberculosis services
    4. Laboratory Services
    5. Well baby Clinics
    6. Antenatal and Postnatal services
   7. Pharmacy
   8. Counselling services
   9. Curative treatment
   10. They issue referral letters to other facilities

LEVEL 3 – Health Centres

These are small hospitals with minimal facilities, yet they offer services like the big hospitals.
They are run by at least one doctor, clinical officers and nurses.

These are some of the services they offer:
   1. Maternity in-patient services with a ward
   2. Curative services
   3. Laboratory services
   4. Dental
   5. Counselling
   6. Pharmacy
   7. TB Clinics
   8. Diabetes & hypertension clinics
   9. Comprehensive care clinics for patients living with HIV
   10. Baby well clinics
   11. Antenatal and postnatal services
   12. They issue referral letters to other facilities




LEVEL 4 – County Hospitals

These are hospitals that offer holistic services and are ran by a director who is a medic and at
best a doctor by profession

In many counties there’s just one hospital but in larger cities like Nairobi there are two
They have in principle the same services as the Level 3 hospitals, plus X-Ray services They
issue referral letters to other facilities




LEVEL 5 – County Referral Hospitals

These are the county referral hospitals formerly the provincial hospitals. They are run by Chief
Executive Officers who are medic by profession and have over 100 beds capacity for their in-
patient. They are also do research about health.

In Nairobi Mama Lucy Hospital and Mbagathi Hospital both double up as county referral
hospitals and Level 4 hospitals.

Services include what other hospitals offer, plus
    1. Ultrasound
    2. CT-Scan
    3. Surgery
    4. Pharmacy
    5. Physiotherapy
    6. Orthopaedics
    7. Occupational Therapy
    8. They issue referral letters to other facilities

LEVEL 6 – National Referral Hospitals

In Kenya there are three Teaching and Research referral hospitals: Mathari Hospital, Kenyatta
National Hospital, Moi Teaching and Referral Hospital and the National Spinal Injury Referral
Hospital. Their range of services is the same as of on Level 5, but they offer specialised
treatments to patients and are not only accessed by Kenyans but do serve East Africa and Central
Africa.

Mathari Teaching and Referral Hospital offers specialised mental services.
Kenyatta National Hospital and Moi Teaching and Referral hospital offer specialised
consultations in curative care.

National Spinal Injury Referral offers specialised services in orthopaedic and spinal injuries.

The national government manages these three hospitals.




Figure 3: Organization of health services in Kenya under a devolved system.

Source: https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Organization-of-health-services-in-Kenya-under-
a-devolved-system_fig5_287964619
Theatre layout and units

Physical layout

Arrangement.

Basic principles for efficient workflow are adhered to when planning the arrangement of rooms
within a surgical suite. For example, traffic must move smoothly and without interruption into,
through, and out of the suite. Those rooms where support activities are performed are grouped
conveniently and systematically about the ORs, which are arranged in pairs with scrub rooms
and sterilizing facilities between them as shown in Figure 1. Proper arrangement of the rooms
reduces the flow of excess traffic, saves much unnecessary walking, and therefore conserves
time and effort.




Size of the Suite.

Numerous factors are considered when estimating the size of the surgical suite required for a
hospital:




The first of these is the operative load or the number of surgical cases to be done per day. Some
hospitals have more patients requiring medical care than surgical care. In such a hospital, only
a small operative section would be necessary. Several operative procedures can be done per day
in each OR, one case following another, but all should be completed by the end of the usual day
shift or shortly thereafter.

The average number of ORs needed is indicated by the number of operative cases to be done
daily divided by the number of cases that can be done daily in one OR.

Operative load can also be broadly interpreted to include the amount of work to be done per day,
outside of actual cases. There is a great deal of preparatory work necessary for each surgical
procedure as well as the routine tasks to maintain the suite. If most supplies are prepared and
sterilized in CMS, the OR suite needs to maintain only a small preparation and sterilization area;
otherwise, it may need a large one.

The second factor, the types of surgery to be done, is even more specific. Some procedures such
as cardiac surgery are very long and detailed, requiring many hours of operative time; others,
such as tonsillectomy, can be accomplished in just 20 to 30 minutes. In the first instance, a single
OR would be engaged for the whole operative day with just one case; in the second example,
eight or ten such procedures could be done in the same length of time.

The number and frequency of emergency cases are also considerations related to the necessary
size of the suite. The larger the troop area near a hospital, the greater the number of accident and
emergency cases that may have to be done. These must be done immediately, meaning that other
scheduled cases may have to wait until after normal duty hours, unless provision has been made
for an additional room.




Size of Individual Operating Room.

In addition to plans for the number of ORs required, the size of each room must also be
considered. Certain types of surgery require the use of much bulky equipment. This is especially
true of open-heart surgery, during which large machines are required to pump and oxygenate
the blood outside of the body and to monitor the functioning of the heart. Factors such as this
must be planned for and sufficient floor space provided so that breaks in aseptic technique due
to overcrowding will be avoided. On the other hand, rooms should be no larger than necessary,
thus reducing the amount of unnecessary times spent walking. The Army criteria for square
footage per room are sufficiently flexible to provide for the needs of its hospitals as shown in
Figure 1, "Type" floor plan for an Army hospital-operating suite.)




Four Areas.
The designations listed in the Four Zone Concept (1) thru (4) are not necessarily used for all
hospitals, but whenever feasible the surgical suite is segregated into four areas for traffic control.
The purpose of such control is to assure maximum protection against infections. In analyzing
the traffic and commerce system of the OR system, specific traffic patterns must be determined.
These are dependent on the entrances and exits for both personnel and materials. Renovation
planning of existing facilities should consider renovation of central supply and storage areas to
bring these as close to the point of utilization as possible. Where entirely new wings, buildings,
or entire hospital complexes are being considered, there is opportunity to design traffic,
materials-handling, and storage systems around the requirements of the surgical suite. Traffic
control design is aided by designation of the four-zone concept (as shown below): the
interchange area, semirestricted area, restricted area, and dirty area.




Figure 4: Medical Theatre layout




Four-zone concept.

Interchange area.

The interchange area is provided to enable persons from outside the surgical suite to meet with
personnel within the suite when necessary. Examples of such rooms are the offices--one for the
OR supervisor and one for the chief of anesthesiology as shown in Figure 1 whenever the offices
for these personnel are situated within the surgical suite. In some hospitals, these offices are
located convenient to but outside the surgical suite in order to keep traffic within the suite to a
minimum. If there is a postanesthesia (recovery) room, it is also classified as an interchange area
although entry is carefully controlled. The main outer corridors are in the interchange area. This
area also consists of the rooms designed for personnel to change from street clothes or military
uniforms into OR attire ("scrub clothing") as shown Figure 1. If space and arrangement permit,
there are two doors to each dressing room--one for the entry of persons in street clothes and the
other for their exit in scrub clothes. The individual lockers are generally equipped with
nametags, locks, and keys. Caps, masks, and scrub clothing are stored in the dressing rooms.
Dressing rooms may be equipped with showers. A mask need not be worn in this area.




Semirestricted area.

Comprising the semirestricted area are corridors within the work area, the anesthesia workroom
and storage, the utility closet, the instrument storage room, the workroom, the linen storage
room, the clean linen room, and the soiled linen room as shown in Figure 1. The semirestricted
area then represents the supply center for the surgical suite. Although, non-sterile procedures
are performed in this area, personnel without OR attire are not admitted. A mask need not be
worn in this area.

Restricted area.

The restricted area consists of all rooms in which sterile procedures are done and sterile goods
are opened or exposed. This includes the individual ORs and the adjacent scrub rooms where
soap, nail files, brushes, timers, and written directions are available for the scrub procedure.
Also included are the preanesthesia rooms (induction rooms) if the suite has this facility. On the
floor plan shown in figure 1-3, a part of the "anesthesia area," (4), may be designated for the
induction of anesthesia. If the suite is arranged to include a substerilizing room between each
two ORs, then these rooms are considered to be restricted because supplies are autoclaved here
without being covered and are moved, uncovered, into the OR. Each person working in the
restricted area is required to wear scrub clothes, cap, and mask.




Dirty area. The dirty area is the disposal area, where all utilized materials and linen are gathered,
packaged, and sent to appropriate areas.




Arrangement of Areas.

There is no one rule that must be followed in the physical arrangement of the four areas
previously discussed. However, the nonrestricted and interchange areas should be located near
the entry door. Workroom areas are situated near the center of the suite, and storage and supply
rooms nearby are positioned to avoid waste in time and energy of personnel. Areas for storage
of both sterile and unsterile supplies must be clearly marked to avoid mistaking one for the other.
If there is no linen chute in the suite, a room for soiled linen is necessary. This room is classified
as semirestricted. If the suite has observation galleries, these are provided with outside entries
to eliminate unnecessary traffic of persons in street clothing.
Figure 5: Theatre layout

Source:                       https://www.researchgate.net/figure/First-case-modified-OT-layout-
plan_fig2_256457508

Learning Activities

Practical activity

Field visit:

Conduct a visit to the nearest county health facility and do the following:

Classify it based on level.

Assess the compliance of the layout and draw a sketch.

Draw the organization structure of the facility
Self-Assessment Questions
   i.   Explain four zone concept in theatre layout.
  ii.   Describe Level 3 health facilities and services offered.
 iii.   Describe nursing department

Answers to Self-Assessment questions

Explain four zone concept in theatre layout.

Four-zone concept.

Interchange area.

The interchange area is provided to enable persons from outside the surgical suite to meet with
personnel within the suite when necessary. Examples of such rooms are the offices--one for the
OR supervisor and one for the chief of anesthesiology as shown in Figure 1 whenever the offices
for these personnel are situated within the surgical suite. In some hospitals, these offices are
located convenient to but outside the surgical suite in order to keep traffic within the suite to a
minimum. If there is a postanesthesia (recovery) room, it is also classified as an interchange area
although entry is carefully controlled. The main outer corridors are in the interchange area. This
area also consists of the rooms designed for personnel to change from street clothes or military
uniforms into OR attire ("scrub clothing") as shown Figure 1. If space and arrangement permit,
there are two doors to each dressing room--one for the entry of persons in street clothes and the
other for their exit in scrub clothes. The individual lockers are generally equipped with
nametags, locks, and keys. Caps, masks, and scrub clothing are stored in the dressing rooms.
Dressing rooms may be equipped with showers. A mask need not be worn in this area.




Semirestricted area.
Comprising the semirestricted area are corridors within the work area, the anesthesia workroom
and storage, the utility closet, the instrument storage room, the workroom, the linen storage
room, the clean linen room, and the soiled linen room as shown in Figure 1. The semirestricted
area then represents the supply center for the surgical suite. Although, non-sterile procedures
are performed in this area, personnel without OR attire are not admitted. A mask need not be
worn in this area.




Restricted area.

The restricted area consists of all rooms in which sterile procedures are done and sterile goods
are opened or exposed. This includes the individual ORs and the adjacent scrub rooms where
soap, nail files, brushes, timers, and written directions are available for the scrub procedure.
Also included are the preanesthesia rooms (induction rooms) if the suite has this facility. On the
floor plan shown in figure 1-3, a part of the "anesthesia area," (4), may be designated for the
induction of anesthesia. If the suite is arranged to include a substerilizing room between each
two ORs, then these rooms are considered to be restricted because supplies are autoclaved here
without being covered and are moved, uncovered, into the OR. Each person working in the
restricted area is required to wear scrub clothes, cap, and mask.




Dirty area. The dirty area is the disposal area, where all utilized materials and linen are gathered,
packaged, and sent to appropriate areas.




Describe Level 3 health facilities and services offered.




LEVEL 3 – Health Centres
These are small hospitals with minimal facilities, yet they offer services like the big hospitals.
They are run by at least one doctor, clinical officers and nurses.

These are some of the services they offer:

Maternity in-patient services with a ward

Curative services

Laboratory services

Dental

Counselling

Pharmacy

TB Clinics

Diabetes & hypertension clinics

Comprehensive care clinics for patients living with HIV

Baby well clinics

Antenatal and postnatal services

They issue referral letters to other facilities




Describe nursing department

The nursing department is the organizational structure through which nurses provide nursing
care for clients under the jurisdiction of the institution. The nursing department consists of
nursing service and nursing education. The primary purpose of the nursing service is to provide
comprehensive, safe, effective and well-organized nursing care through the personnel of the
department. The personnel consists of nursing superintendent, assistant nursing superintendents,
head nurses and staff nurses. All of these are registered nurses, other personnel who function in
the nursing service department may include the auxiliary personnel nurse aids and domestics
who handle the non-nursing services.

The nursing education section has the responsibility of preparing nursing students to become
professional nurses. Uplifting the standard of nursing by inservice education and refresher
courses etc., are included in the functions of this department. The personnel consists of principal
or director of nursing education, the associate professors, assistant professors, tutors and clinical
instructors.

Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials

The following resources are provided:

Tools

PPEs

Safety boots

Goggles

Dust coats

First aid kit

Overalls

Stationery

Cupboard drawers

Internet
References

https://www.canestar.com/list-of-departments-in-hospital-and-its-functions----a-simple-
learning-for-nurses..html 25/02/2021 at 13:34pm

Mwabu, G., Ainsworth, M., & Nyamete, A. (1993). Quality of medical care and choice of
medical treatment in Kenya: an empirical analysis. Journal of Human Resources, 838-862.

https://roggkenya.org/about-this-site-reporting-on-good-governance-and-corruption-in-kenya/
Learning outcome 2: Demonstrate the knowledge of medical equipment in basic patient
care

Introduction to the learning outcome

  This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to demonstrate the
  knowledge of medical equipment in basic patient care. It comprises meaning of terms, types of
  health facility equipment and instruments, functions of health facility equipment and
  instruments, care and maintenance of health facility equipment and instruments, learning
  activities, self-assessment questions and answers, learning activities, tools, equipment, supplies
  and materials and references.

  Performance Standard
       i.   2.3.1 Health facility equipment and instruments are identified as per the workplace
            procedures
    ii.     2.3.2 Functions of health facility equipment and instruments are identified as per the
            workplace procedures
   iii.     2.3.3 Malfunctioning equipment and instruments are identified and reported as per the
            workplace procedures

  Information sheet

Meaning of terms

  Radiology is the science dealing with X-rays and other high-energy radiation, especially the use
  of such radiation for the diagnosis and treatment of disease.

  Diagnostic is concerned with the diagnosis of illness or other problems.

  Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a medical imaging technique used in radiology to form
  pictures of the anatomy and the physiological processes of the body. MRI scanners use strong
  magnetic fields, magnetic field gradients, and radio waves to generate images of the organs in
  the body.
Cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) is a technique in which a machine temporarily takes over the
function of the heart and lungs during surgery, maintaining the circulation of blood and the
oxygen content of the patient's body.

A nebulizer is a piece of medical equipment that a person with asthma or another respiratory
condition can use to administer medication directly and quickly to the lungs. A nebulizer turns
liquid medicine into a very fine mist that a person can inhale through a face mask or mouthpiece.

Types of health facility equipment/instruments and functions

Diagnostic Equipment

Diagnostic medical equipment is any type of equipment or tools used in a hospital setting for
the sole purpose of diagnosing a patient’s condition. Based on the symptoms described by the
patient, a diagnostic test is performed using the appropriate equipment to evaluate the patient
internally. The doctor or technician is looking for any abnormalities in the affected organs or
parts of the body that are causing the symptoms to be exhibited.

Below are some of the most common types of diagnostic equipment used in laboratories and
medical clinics:

Medical imaging machines – Medical imaging is a type of technology that is used to create
visual representations of the human body’s interior. The visual image produced by the
equipment is used for clinical analysis and medical intervention. There are many medical
imaging equipment, such as radiography (X-ray machine), computed tomography (CT scan),
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI scan), ultrasound, and echocardiography, to name a few.

Aside from medical imaging machines, there are other medical devices used for diagnosing
patients. Some examples include patient scales, stethoscopes, dopplers, and pulse oximetry.

Durable Medical Equipment (DME)

This type of medical equipment is used mainly for providing therapeutic benefits for certain
conditions or illnesses. The use of this equipment must be prescribed by a physician, which is
designed to serve a medical purpose. It is a long-term and reusable device that can be used in
the hospital or at home for patient care. There are several types of durable medical equipment
such as the following:

Manual wheelchairs or electric wheelchairs

Hospital beds

Walkers, crutches, canes (or any similar type of mobility assistive equipment)

Traction equipment

Pressure mattresses

Insulin pumps

Breast pumps

Nebulizers

Patient lifts

Bili lights and blankets

Kidney machines

Stationary or portable oxygen tanks

Oxygen Concentrators Ventilators

The term ‘durable’ is derived from the fact that these types of equipment have been tested for
quality. They are designed to provide support for the safety and comfort of the patients. They
should be able to deliver just that. Some of the common features of durable medical equipment
include non-slip features and load-bearing strength. Since this equipment is prescribed by the
physician for the benefit of the patient, the cost of acquiring one is often covered by health
insurance plans.
Treatment Equipment

Treatment equipment is any type of medical device or tool that is designed to treat a specific
condition. It utilizes modern technology in order to address any abnormalities to restore function
in the affected organs or tissues within the body. This can also include the surgical supplies
designed to provide treatment for certain conditions that require surgical intervention.

Below are common examples of medical treatment equipment that you will find in hospitals and
clinics:

Infusion Pumps – This type of treatment equipment is used in a hospital setting. It is designed
to infuse medication, fluids, and other forms of treatment to the patient’s circulatory system.
This machine is used intravenously but you can also find epidural or arterial infusions. This
machine is reliable because it injects controlled amounts of fluids into the patient’s system over
a given period of time.

LASIK Surgical Machines – The use of LASIK technology is used primarily for the treatment
of eye conditions. It is designed for use on patients suffering from myopia, hyperopia, or
astigmatism.

Medical Lasers – The laser is a revolutionary technology introduced in the medical field for the
treatment of various medical conditions. It is a device that emits a wavelength of electromagnetic
radiation for clinical applications. These wavelengths vary when it comes to energy level and
pulse duration. These settings are to be determined by the attending physician during treatment.

Meanwhile, treatment equipment used for surgical procedures include the following:

Diagnostic scopes

Surgical caps, gowns, gloves, or glasses (for the surgical team)

Gauze and drapes (for patients)

Life Support Equipment
As the name implies, life support equipment are those medical devices intended to maintain the
bodily function of a patient. Without life support, it will be difficult for the patient’s organ
systems to function on their own. There are a variety of life support machines in the medical
field today, such as the following:

Heart-lung Machines – Also known as cardiopulmonary bypass (CB) devices, this type of
equipment temporarily functions as the heart or lungs of a patient during surgery. It facilitates
in the circulation of blood and oxygen throughout the patient’s body. It is known as a form of
extracorporeal circulation.

Medical Ventilators – This type of device is designed to move breathable air in and out of the
lungs. It is used on patients who have difficulty breathing, or who are incapable of delivering an
adequate supply of oxygen throughout the body. There are two types of medical ventilators. One
is hand-operated using a bag valve mask. The other is run and operated by a computer. You will
find this machine used in intensive care unit patients or home care patients.

Dialysis Machine – Dialysis is the method of removing excess solutes or toxins from the blood.
It is used on people whose kidneys have been damaged and are incapable of performing these
functions. It is a type of renal replacement therapy. Dialysis machines are essential for those
who have kidney damage or lost kidney function.

Incubators – An incubator is a medical apparatus used for neonatal intensive care. It is designed
to mimic the environmental conditions suitable for newborn babies. It is often used in
conjunction with a few other medical equipment such as an oxygen hood and ventilator.

Medical Laboratory Equipment

The use of medical laboratory equipment is often seen in medical clinics or diagnostic
laboratories. These types of equipment are intended for the analysis of blood, urine, genes, and
other biological material. Below are the most common examples of medical laboratory
equipment used in the medical field:

Blood gas analyzers
Chemistry analyzers

Blood collection supplies

Electrolyte analyzers

Differential counters

Drug testing analyzers

Coagulation analyzers

Hematology analyzers

Urinalysis analyzers

Microbiological systems

As medical technology continues to develop, you can expect that there will be more types of
medical equipment emerging. This is good news to patients who can expect quality medical care
and diagnosis utilizing the latest in medical technology.

Ceiling Mounted Equipment

Expect a Surgical and an Anaesthetic Pendant in any theatre which have power, data and various
gas outlets. There are several major suppliers on the market with numerous different types.
Pendants can be rigid, rigid-retractable or fully articulated. Theatres require fully articulated
pendants for maximum flexibility. A lot of co-ordination is required between medical gas,
electrical, and pendant trade contractors together with electrical, mechanical and structural
engineers/consultants while installing pendants to ensure all structural steel support is in place,
gas pipes are properly connected and power and data cables run at the correct programmed dates.
Various life saving equipment must be powered off Isolated Power Supply (IPS) which is also
backed up by Un-interruptible Power Supply (UPS), in case of power failure during surgery.
Theatre Lights

There used to be the Gas Discharge lights or Halogen lights. Aspects to consider were bulb life,
costs associated and Theatre down time while bulbs were changed.

There is a new kid on the block in the last few years – LED technology. About 30% more
expensive compared to the existing technology but very long life bulbs (over 20,000 hours),
ease of maintenance (couple of minutes to replace an LED), cheap cost of replacement (fraction
of older technology) and ability to vary light temperature hence helping to diagnose cancerous
cells etc. Theatre Lights must be backed up by a battery back up in case of power failure during
surgery. Suggested time can be 3 hours back up. Note that general lighting and emergency
escape lighting should also be on similar battery/UPS back up time. The battery backup unit can
be a large wall mounted cabinet about 1m x 1m and about 300-400mm deep. It will need to be
mounted not far from the Theatre Lights but not inside the clinical space.




Camera

In a teaching facility, a camera (now a days High Definition Camera) and microphone is also
required for one way video (from Operating Theatre to Lecture Theatre and/or Seminar Rooms)
and two-way audio for surgeons and students to communicate. The camera can either be
installed in the handle of the main Theatre Light of installed on a separate ceiling mounted arm.
Consider all implications for power and data transfer (HD requires much higher bit rate transfer).
Consider a wireless Reality TV/Big Brother style microphone on the surgeon to allow freedom
of movement.

In Orthopaedic Theatres you would need to consider the largest ceiling mounted item – The
Laminar Flow or the Ultra Clean Ventilation (UCV) Canopy. This item will need a separate
article as we are planning a general Theatre in this article.




Wall Mounted Equipment
Surgeons Panel

The panels can the older style steel type or the more current Membrane Type panels which allow
ease of cleaning/disinfection. The membrane can be made anti-microbial by inclusion of silver
nitrate. A newer version of panels can be touch screen which is now proving very popular taking
over the mechanical switch panels and allows a lot of functionality simply by programming as
the Theatre changes over time and new items are added and old removed.

For ease of cleaning and aesthetics, the panels should be flush mounted.

Note that all the pendants, theatre lights, general lights, gas alarm panel, IPS/UPS, and warning
signs for X-Ray in-use / Laser in-use signs outside Theatre, air sampling ducts, clocks etc need
considered and carefully co-ordinated among the trade contractors and design consultants for
services and wiring.

Floor Mounted Equipment

Theatre Table

Generally these are rechargeable and don’t necessarily require power socket close by.

Trolleys

Trolleys are used for instruments and equipment such as video endoscopes and anaesthetic
equipment.

We mentioned ease of cleaning at the start. To enable this the walls should have special plastic
enamel paint to allow chemical cleaning if required in case of disinfection. The ceiling is
generally constructed of plaster board or special metal to ensure it is air-tight and easily cleaned.

Airflow regime is an important part of moving the air from clean areas towards dirty and out of
the Operating Theatre suite to ensure the Theatre is the most clean environment for operating
on the patients.
I trust the above has given you some basics to consider when planning your next operating
theatre.

Care and maintenance of health facility equipment and instruments

Most commonly used electric equipments in the hospitals are:

Computers

Refrigerators

Cardiac monitors

Pulse oxymeter

Suction apparatus

Nebulizer

Syringe pump

Glucometer

Ultrasound

CT & MRI machines

Ventilator

Defibrillator
Proper care and maintenance is very important for proper functioning of equipment.

Medical Equipment Care and Maintenance Tips

There's just no getting around the fact that medical equipment is expensive. Even if you manage
to find gently used equipment that is in good condition and current enough to benefit your
practice, you'll probably still shell out some dough for it. So you want to make sure it lasts as
long as possible.

This requires you to practice proper care and maintenance, especially for the equipment you
tend to use day in and day out. You need it to work properly so that you can offer your patients
the best possible care. If it breaks down, not only are you left trying to figure out how to treat
patients on the fly, but it doesn't exactly make your practice look reliable.

Even with proper maintenance and repair, you can't always control equipment failures, but your
best bet to keep these pricy machines in good working order is consistent care. Here are a few
maintenance and care tips to get you started.




Proper Usage

Maintaining your medical equipment starts with the way you treat it every day, including how
you use it. Smacking your old tube TV may have improved reception, but it's definitely not
going to make your sensitive equipment work better or faster.

Okay, so you're probably not going to hit your machinery, but if you're using it improperly, you
might as well. Your mantra should be "use only as directed", and with most machinery, you'll
have plenty of in-depth instructions to peruse. If you're not sure about proper usage, take the
time to call customer support with any questions.
When you use equipment in a way that is not recommended, you not only risk harming the
machinery (and possibly patients), but you may open yourself up to liability. In other words, it's
important to practice proper usage.




Follow Manufacturer Guidelines

Manufacturers not only provide instructions related to how to properly use equipment, but also
how to maintain it. Whether you're supposed to run regular diagnostics and updates to firmware
and software or you're advised to hire professional technicians for regular inspection and
maintenance, it's always best to follow manufacturer guidelines concerning maintenance.

This will give you the best opportunity to ensure proper function and longevity, as well as help
you to avoid potentially costly snafus should machinery fail.




In-house Maintenance

There are certain maintenance and repair tasks for which your staff probably isn't qualified.
However, you may find that you, your office personnel, or in-house support services (if you're
in a hospital setting) can handle some of the basic maintenance tasks.

This could not only allow you some measure of immediate response should equipment suffer
problems, reducing downtime, but it can also help to reduce the expense associated with ongoing
equipment maintenance costs.

You just have to be aware of what you (or your support staff) are capable of handling so that
you know when it's necessary to bring in professional help.




Hire Qualified Technicians
At the very least, you should have equipment serviced regularly by qualified technicians. Just
like you hire an HVAC technician to inspect, clean, and maintain your home HVAC system
annually and you take your car to the mechanic every three months or 3,000 miles, you should
bring in the pros to maintain your medical equipment regularly.

You do have some options for service contracts, though. You could, for example, use OEM
(original equipment manufacturer) technicians. These specialists are likely to be the costliest,
but also the most qualified to maintain and repair equipment.

Another option is to hire third-party vendors. The upside here is that you'll likely pay a little less
and technicians may be able to service a variety of equipment instead of just one brand or
category. The potential drawback is that this vendor could be a Jack of all trades and a master
of none, so to speak.

A final option is remote assistance. If you have an issue that requires immediate attention,
customer support may be able to talk you through needed repairs or even access equipment that
has internet connection capabilities in order to diagnose and fix problems.




Understand Warranties

Although proper usage, care, and maintenance should help to keep your equipment running
properly for a good long while, problems can still occur. If this happens, you need to know how
your warranty works so that you can receive compensation of some sort. Often, a failure to
complete recommended maintenance could void your warranty.

General Principles of Care:

All objects to be disinfected or sterilized should first be thoroughly cleaned to remove all organic
matter (blood and tissue) and other residue.

All items used in patient care shall be kept clean and in proper working condition.
All medical instruments and other items used for patient care must be cleaned and disinfected
or sterilized before use on another patient.

Excessive moisture on electrical components can cause damage to certain instruments.
Disinfectants and cleaners sprayed directly onto electrical devices may cause them to short
circuit. This can also happen with excessively wet cleaning cloths.

Refer to the manufacturer’s instructions for use of the appropriate type of disinfectant and the
best method of cleaning and sterilizing each piece of medical instrumentation

Ethyl or isopropyl alcohol (70%-90%) is used for chemical disinfection.

For routine cleaning of most of the items, a ammonium germicidal detergent is available.

Cleaning and decontamination should begin as soon as possible after use as blood and body
fluids can cause pitting of instruments and if left to dry can be difficult to remove.

When transport to the decontamination area is going to be delayed, soiled instruments should be
moistened with a wet towel or enzymatic solution. 10. Decontamination and packaging should
not be performed in patient care areas.

Perform periodic calibration of the equipment and the equipments that are faulty should be sent
to the Bio-medical Engineering Department.

Clean properly

To prevent bacteria growth, the equipment should be inspected before each use and cleaned as
often as necessary.

Use rubbing alcohol and a soft cloth or gauze pads to clean the equipment. If needed, dry the
equipment with a clean paper towel and throw the towel away.

Also clean the equipment after each use to prevent buildup of debris.

Disinfect after each use
Besides keeping it clean, another important aspect of medical equipment maintenance is
disinfecting after each use.

There are different disinfecting procedures depending on the equipment you are using. Check
with your manufacturer or distributor for more information

Storage

Medical equipment should be stored in a clean and dry location so that it is not exposed to dust,
direct sunlight, moisture, extreme temperatures or other potentially hazardous forces.

Even when not in use medical equipment can deteriorate over time, make sure that you are
regularly inspecting it. If you notice any damaged or defective parts, stop using the equipment
and repair or replace the equipment

Many types of medical equipment need to be serviced by qualified technicians at regular
intervals. Make sure you are aware of this schedule




Learning Activities

Practical activity

Care and maintenance of a refrigerator.

You are provided with a refrigerator that has been in operation for one and half years without
maintenance. Plan and execute its maintenance following the required principles.

Self-Assessment Questions

Enumerate most common examples of medical laboratory equipment used in the medical field.

Explain uses of medical imaging machines

List general principles of care for medical machines and equipment
Answers to Self-Assessment questions

1. Enumerate most common examples of medical laboratory equipment used in the
medical field.

Blood gas analyzers

Chemistry analyzers

Blood collection supplies

Electrolyte analyzers

Differential counters

Drug testing analyzers

Coagulation analyzers

Hematology analyzers

Urinalysis analyzers

Microbiological systems




Explain uses of medical imaging machines

Medical imaging machines – Medical imaging is a type of technology that is used to create
visual representation of the human body’s interior. The visual image produced by the equipment
is used for clinical analysis and medical intervention. There are many medical imaging
equipment, such as radiography (X-ray machine), computed tomography (CT scan), magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI scan), ultrasound, and echocardiography, to name a few.
List general principles of care for medical machines and equipment

All objects to be disinfected or sterilized should first be thoroughly cleaned to remove all organic
matter (blood and tissue) and other residue.

All items used in patient care shall be kept clean and in proper working condition.

All medical instruments and other items used for patient care must be cleaned and disinfected
or sterilized before use on another patient.

Excessive moisture on electrical components can cause damage to certain instruments.
Disinfectants and cleaners sprayed directly onto electrical devices may cause them to short
circuit. This can also happen with excessively wet cleaning cloths.

Refer to the manufacturer’s instructions for use of the appropriate type of disinfectant and the
best method of cleaning and sterilizing each piece of medical instrumentation

Ethyl or isopropyl alcohol (70%-90%) is used for chemical disinfection.

For routine cleaning of most of the items, a ammonium germicidal detergent is available.

Cleaning and decontamination should begin as soon as possible after use as blood and body
fluids can cause pitting of instruments and if left to dry can be difficult to remove.

When transport to the decontamination area is going to be delayed, soiled instruments should be
moistened with a wet towel or enzymatic solution. 10. Decontamination and packaging should
not be performed in patient care areas.

Perform periodic calibration of the equipment and the equipments that are faulty should be sent
to the Bio-medical Engineering Department.

Clean properly

To prevent bacteria growth, the equipment should be inspected before each use and cleaned as
often as necessary.
Use rubbing alcohol and a soft cloth or gauze pads to clean the equipment. If needed, dry the
equipment with a clean paper towel and throw the towel away.

Also clean the equipment after each use to prevent buildup of debris.

Disinfect after each use

Besides keeping it clean, another important aspect of medical equipment maintenance is
disinfecting after each use.

There are different disinfecting procedures depending on the equipment you are using. Check
with your manufacturer or distributor for more information

Storage

Medical equipment should be stored in a clean and dry location so that it is not exposed to dust,
direct sunlight, moisture, extreme temperatures or other potentially hazardous forces.

Even when not in use medical equipment can deteriorate over time, make sure that you are
regularly inspecting it. If you notice any damaged or defective parts, stop using the equipment
and repair or replace the equipment

Many types of medical equipment need to be serviced by qualified technicians at regular
intervals. Make sure you are aware of this schedule




Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials

The following resources are provided:

Tools

PPEs
 Safety boots

 Goggles

 Dust coats

 First aid kit

 Overalls




 Health facility

 Manufacturers’ machine operating manuals for all laboratory equipment.

 Supplier’s equipment warranty cards.

 Date of equipment purchase

 Running tap water

 Calibration reports

 Equipment maintenance schedules

 Laboratory practice manuals

 Stationery

 Cupboard drawers

 Internet




References
    Kanyangarara, M., Munos, M. K., & Walker, N. (2017). Quality of antenatal care service
    provision in health facilities across sub–Saharan Africa: Evidence from nationally representative
    health facility assessments. Journal of global health, 7(2).

    Ziraba, A. K., Mills, S., Madise, N., Saliku, T., & Fotso, J. C. (2009). The state of emergency
    obstetric care services in Nairobi informal settlements and environs: results from a maternity
    health facility survey. BMC health services research, 9(1), 1-8




                                           CHAPTER THREE

                                       COMMON DISEASES

    Unit of learning code: HE/CU/TT/CC/03/6/A

    Related    Unit    of   Competency       in   Occupational     Standard:     DEMONSTRATE
    KNOWLEDGE OF COMMON DISEASES

    Introduction to the unit of learning

    This unit specifies the competencies required to demonstrate the knowledge of common
    diseases. It involves identifying the stages of disease development, demonstrating the
    knowledge of communicable diseases, non-communicable diseases and management of
    common diseases

    Summary of Learning Outcomes
1     Identify the stages of disease development
2     Demonstrate the knowledge of communicable diseases
3     Demonstrate the knowledge of non-communicable diseases
4     Demonstrate the knowledge on management of common diseases

Learning outcome 1 Identify the stages of disease development

Introduction to the learning outcome
    This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to identify the stages of
    disease development. It includes Meaning of terms, Types of diseases, Natural history of a
    disease and Stages of disease development

    Performance Standard
1     Common diseases are identified as per WHO epidemiological patterns
2     Common diseases are classified as per WHO classification guidelines
3     Natural history of common diseases is identified as per WHO guidelines


Information Sheet

Definitions of terms

    Endemic: The persistent presence of a disease within a geographical area in low to moderate
    levels not enough to deplete the pool of susceptible persons.

    Hyperendemic: Persistently high level of occurrence of a disease.

    Sporadic: An irregular pattern of occurrence of with occasional cases occurring at irregular
    intervals.

    Epidemic/ outbreak: The occurrence of a disease within an area which is clearly in excess of
    the expected level for a given time period.

    public health practioners prefer the term outbreak because it is less alarming/provocative.

    Pandemic: An epidemic that is spread over several countries or continents and          affects large
    numbers of people.

    Acute:       Develops rapidly and runs its course quickly e.g. measles and influenza

    Chronic:       Develops slowly and less severe because a weakened but viable organism is
    responsible. It persists for long indeterminate period of time e.g. TB and Leprosy.
Latent:           Characterized by periods that is free from symptoms and signs. No active
multiplication of agent is taking place e.g. syphilis.

Localized:       Confined to specific area e.g. boils.

Systemic/Generalized: Affecting the entire body with pathogens widely distributed in many
tissues e.g. septicaemia (growth of bacteria throughout the circulatory system).

Inapparent/subclinical: Not producing symptoms in the host at a particular time.

Symptoms:        Disease characteristics observed or felt by the patient only

Sign: Disease characteristic observed by examining through visual appreciation or using an
instrument.

Syndrome: A combination of signs and symptoms occurring together in an illness. Syndrome
can be used in absence of clinical test to diagnose disease and institute appropriate action.

Sequelae:     After effects left by certain diseases e.g. paralysis after infection with polio virus.

Types of diseases

Communicable, or infectious diseases, are caused by microorganisms such as bacteria, viruses,
parasites and fungi that can be spread, directly or indirectly, from one person to another. Some
are transmitted through bites from insects while others are caused by ingesting contaminated
food or water.

A variety of disease-producing bacteria and viruses are carried in the mouth, nose, throat and
respiratory tract. Conditions such as leprosy, tuberculosis (TB) and different strains of influenza
(flu) can be spread by coughing, sneezing, and saliva or mucus on unwashed hands.

Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) such as HIV and viral hepatitis are spread through the
exposure to infective bodily fluids such as blood, vaginal secretions and semen. Hepatitis is a
significant concern in the African Region and the majority of people living with hepatitis B and
C are unaware of their infections.
        Insects play a significant role in the transmission of disease. Bites from Anopheles mosquitoes
        transmits malaria parasites that can wreak havoc on high-risk populations such as children under
        age 5 and pregnant women. Yellow fever has also seen resurgence due to reduced vaccination
        efforts. Many neglected tropical diseases are caused by unsafe water, poor housing conditions
        and poor sanitation in the Region.

        List of Communicable Diseases

   I.     Flu
  II.     Hepatitis A
 III.     Hepatitis B
 IV.      HIV/AIDS
  V.      Measles
 VI.      Pertussis
VII.      Rabies
VIII.     Sexually Transmitted Disease
 IX.      Shigellosis
  X.      Tuberculosis
 XI.      West Nile Virus
XII.      Zika




          Natural history of a disease:

        Refers to the progress of a disease process in an individual without intervention over time
        including complications, symptoms change, remissions, disability cure recovery and death.

        The process begins with exposure to or accumulation of factors capable of causing disease in a
        susceptible host.

        Most diseases have a characteristic natural history although the time frame and the specific
        manifestations of the disease vary from person to person.
Stages in the natural history of a disease:

1.       Incubation Period:
          Pathogen has embedded in the body of a susceptible host.
          No signs and symptoms are apparent.
          Micro-organisms have invaded the host and are migrating to various tissues causing
           some pathological changes.
          The pathogens have not increased to sufficient numbers to produce enough toxins to
           produce discomfort nor cause the individual to be infective.
          The period is usually variable in length and usually disease specific.
2.       Prodromal stage:
          First symptoms of the disease appear.
          Patient is aware of discomfort but no precise signs/symptoms to permit diagnosis
          Patient highly contagious to others.
          Host immune responses become operative.
          Marks transition from sub-clinical to clinical disease.
3.       Clinical stage:
          Period of illness
          Characteristic disease symptoms occur.
          Most diagnoses are made during this stage.
          During the acute stage of this period, the patient is sufficiently ill to alter work/ school
           activities.
          In some people the disease process may never progress to clinically apparent illness.
          In others the disease process may result in a wide spectrum of clinical illness, ranging
           from mild to severe or fatal.
          Chemotherapeutic intervention or adequate immune response may lead to recovery.
4.       Decline stage
          Period of decline if disease is not fatal
          First sign of recovery manifests i.e. disappearance of signs and symptoms.
          Disease starts to end.
          Disease becomes latent or intermittently recurs.
5.          Convalescent stage
             Disease ends
             Progresses to carrier stage or freedom from pathogen.
             Body’s defense may provide lifelong immunity.
6.          Full Recovery
             Marks the end of disease syndrome and return to full health.

Learning outcome 2: Demonstrate the knowledge of communicable diseases

     INTRODUCTION COMMUNICABLE DISEASES

     A disease that is passed from one person to another person is called a communicable or
     transmissible disease. Transmissible diseases include: measles, HIV infection, tuberculosis,
     chickenpox, gonorrhoea, scabies, malaria, cholera, and roundworms among others.
     Communicable diseases are among the most important diseases in this country. They are
     important because:

     Many of them are common

     Some of them are very serious and cause death and disability

     Some of them cause widespread outbreaks of disease – epidemics

     Most of them can be prevented by fairly simple means

     In this section you will cover disease patterns in the community, the meaning of host and
     infection, as well as the transmission cycle of communicable diseases.

     Patterns of Communicable Diseases in the Community

     Different diseases are common in different places and at different times. To understand why this
     happens, you need to consider the disease causative organisms (the agents); the people they
     infect (the hosts); and the surroundings in which they live (the environment).
A delicate balance exists between the agent, the host and the environment and it can change in
different ways. For instance, the agent needs a suitable environment in which to grow and
multiply and thus be able to spread and infect other hosts. If the environment does not support
the agent it dies or transforms to a dormant state.

The host (person) is also affected by the environment. For example, a person may live in a hot,
wet climate where there are many mosquitoes. However they can change this environment by
draining swamps, clearing the vegetation and adding competing hosts such as animals. If the
balance is shifted against the agent, the disease will be controlled and the number of cases will
go down.

EPIDEMIOLOGIC TRIANGLE




When the balance between the agent, the host and the environment is fairly constant, you tend
to see approximately the same number of cases of the disease every month. When this happens
the disease is said to be endemic. When the balance is shifted in favour of the agent (organism),
for example, when many non immune children have been born in an area since the last measles
epidemic, a large number of cases of measles may occur in a short time. This is called an
epidemic. Epidemic diseases occur during certain periods or seasons and cause sudden deaths
and much suffering in the community.

An endemic disease can be termed as that which occurs in a given population at a constant rate
over a period of several years. An epidemic disease is that which occurs in a population at a
higher rate than is usually the normal for that population over a given time interval.

Diagrammatically the endemic and epidemic disease patterns can be illustrated as follows:-




Some Common Epidemic Diseases in Kenya

      Cholera
      Typhoid fever
      Highland malaria
      Acute bacterial meningitis

In Kenya, malaria is endemic in the lowlands, such as the Tana River basin, the coastal strip,
and the Lake Victoria region. Schistosomiasis which is related to water use is endemic around
the Lake Victoria region and the Mwea irrigation scheme. Leishmaniasis is endemic in Baringo,
along Tana River, and along the River Athi in Machakos.

In some parts of the country, some disease outbreaks occur only occasionally without a regular
pattern. Such diseases are said to be sporadic in their occurrence.

The Host and Infection

At this stage, infection does not produce clear signs and symptoms. The host's immune system
is trying to fight off the agent. In some cases, the organism is overcome by the host immune
cells hence no signs and symptoms are felt and the infection process is terminated.

Clinical Infection

This is the period when the host develops detectable symptoms and signs of an illness. At this
time the agent has multiplied within the host overcoming the host's immune system and has
started causing abnormal functioning of some body cells and tissues. This produces overt signs
and symptoms of the disease.

It is important for you to understand these stages because people with symptoms are easier to
identify as they come to your health facilities for treatment. People with sub-clinical infections
do not always know they are infected and hence are a danger to other people. They are also
difficult to detect in the general population without special tests. An individual who is suffering
from a sub-clinical infection is also likely to infect others, as in the case of HIV infection which
leads to AIDS after a long period.

They are therefore known as carriers. An individual who develops a clinical or sub-clinical
infection is said to be susceptible to the disease. A susceptible individual is one whose body
lacks resistance to the disease. Resistance of the body to a disease occurs due to various
immunity mechanisms.




Modes of transmission of communicable diseases
1.     Direct contact, for example sexual contact, contact with skin or mucous membranes
2.     Vectors
3.     Faecal-oral (ingesting contaminated food and water)
4.     Airborne
5.     Tran placental (mother to foetus)
6.     Blood contact (transfusion, surgery, injection)
7.     Contact with animals or their products

     The Disease Transmission Cycle

     A disease transmission cycle is a series of steps that a disease-causing organism undergoes in
     its disease-causing process. Disease-causing organisms are living things that need somewhere
     to live and reproduce. This may be within inanimate or animate environment (example in
     rodents, insect, or the human body), which is known as the reservoir of infection. The human
     being is the main reservoir of most of the communicable diseases that affect humanity.

     When an infection spreads to a new host, the place, animal or human from which the organism
     came from is called the source of the infection. The way in which an organism leaves the source
     (the infected host) and passes to a new susceptible host is called the route of transmission. Each
     disease-causing organism has particular routes which play a large part in how these organisms
     spread in the community.

     For example, some organisms are spread through water and food, while others are spread by
     vectors like mosquitoes and snails. The diagram below illustrates the differences between the
     disease transmission cycle in measles, and in malaria where the causative organism passes from
     human being to mosquito and back to the human being.
Every transmission cycle is made up of three parts:-

The Source

This is where the disease-causing organisms spread from. It could be an infected person, animal,
place, or object. The reservoir is the source of infection.

Transmission Route

The main routes of transmission are:

  I.   Direct contact, for example sexual contact, contact with skin or mucous membranes
 II.   Vectors
III.   Faecal-oral (ingesting contaminated food and water)
IV.    Airborne
 V.    Tran placental (mother to foetus)
VI.    Blood contact (transfusion, surgery, injection)
VII.   Contact with animals or their products

Susceptible Host

An individual who has low resistance to a particular disease is said to be a susceptible host for
that disease. There are a number of factors which lower the body's resistance to a disease:
Not having come in contact with the disease-causing organisms before and therefore not having
any immunity to it. For example, passive immunity against measles is lost at the age of 6 - 12
months. Therefore if a child comes into contact with the measles virus after this age, they may
develop the disease.

Having a serious illness like AIDS which suppresses a person’s immunity. People with AIDS
have a high risk of developing tuberculosis.

Malnutrition

Certain drugs such as those used to treat cancer can lower a person’s resistance to disease.

  Learning outcome 3 Demonstrate the knowledge of non-communicable diseases

Meaning of terms

What is a Non-Communicable Disease?

▶ A non-communicable disease are diseases that cannot be spread from person to person.

▶ Some non-communicable diseases are chronic.

Chronic means that it is present either continuously or on and off over a long period.

▶ Multiple Sclerosis is an example of a degenerative disease.

Degenerative disease is a disease that causes breakdown in body cells, tissues, and organs as it
progresses

Diseases Present at Birth

▶Some congenital diseases are caused by heredity, while others are caused by a mother’s choice
of lifestyle while pregnant.

▶ Congenital Disorders are all disorders that are present when the baby is born
  ▶ Heredity is the passing of traits from parents to their children.

  ▶ Examples of traits that can be passed from parents to their children are: eye color, sickle cell
  anemia, etc.

  Risk factors of non-communicable diseases

  a) Heredity

  b) Age

  c) Gender

  d) Ethnic Group

Factors that you Can Control:

  i. Eat healthy food

  ii. Stay physically active

  iii. Maintain a healthy weight

  iv. Get enough sleep

  v. Manage stress

  vi. Avoid tobacco, alcohol and other drugs

  Environmental Factors and Disease

  ▶ Many substances in the environment can cause serious health problems (ex. lead in fish)

  ▶ Carbon Monoxide in high levels can cause illness and death

  ▶ Smog can cause respiratory / breathing problems in some people
Common Non-Communicable Diseases

Some no communicable diseases are more common than others. The four main types of no
communicable diseases include cardiovascular disease, cancer, chronic respiratory disease, and
diabetes.

Cardiovascular disease
  I.       Poor diet and physical inactivity can cause increased:
 II.       blood pressure
III.       blood glucose
IV.        blood lipids
 V.        obesity

These conditions increase the risk of developing cardiovascular disease. Some people are born
with (genetically predisposed to have) certain cardiovascular conditions.

Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of non-communicable disease deaths. Some common
non-communicable cardiovascular conditions and diseases include:
          Heart attack
          Stroke
          Coronary artery disease
          Cerebrovascular disease
          Peripheral artery disease (PAD)
          Congenital heart disease
          Deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism




Cancer
Cancer affects people of all ages, socioeconomic statuses, genders, and ethnicities. It’s the
second most-common cause of non-communicable disease death globally.
Some cancers cannot be avoided due to genetic risks. However, the World Health Organization
estimates that of cancers are preventable with adoption of healthy lifestyle choices.
  Key steps in preventing disease include:
        avoiding tobacco
        limiting alcohol
        getting immunized against cancer-causing infections

  The most common cancer deaths in men worldwide include:
     1. lung
     2. liver
     3. stomach
     4. colorectal
     5. prostate

  The most common cancer deaths in women worldwide include:
     1. breast
     2. lung
     3. colorectal
     4. cervical
     5. stomach

Chronic respiratory disease

  Chronic respiratory diseases are ailments affecting the airways and lung structures. Some of
  these diseases have a genetic basis. However, other causes include lifestyle choices such as
  smoking and environmental conditions like exposure to air pollution, poor air quality, and poor
  ventilation. While these diseases are incurable, they can be managed with medical treatment.

  The most common chronic respiratory diseases include:
        chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
        asthma
        occupational lung diseases, such as black lung
        pulmonary hypertension
        cystic fibrosis
Diabetes

Diabetes occurs when the body cannot produce enough insulin, a hormone that regulates blood
sugar (glucose). It can also occur when the body cannot effectively use the insulin it
produces.Some effects of diabetes include heart disease, vision loss, and kidney injury. If blood
sugar levels are not controlled, diabetes can seriously damage other organs and systems in the
body over time.There are two main types of diabetes:

Type 1 diabetes is often diagnosed during childhood or young adulthood. It’s the result of an
immune system dysfunction.

Type 2 diabetes is often acquired during later adulthood. It’s typically the result of poor diet,
inactivity, obesity, and other lifestyle and environmental factors.

Other types of diabetes include:

gestational diabetes, which causes elevated blood sugar in 3 to 8 percent of pregnant women
in the United States

prediabetes, a condition defined by higher-than-normal blood sugar levels that lead to a very
high risk of developing type 2 diabetes in the near future

  Learning outcome 4 Demonstrate the knowledge on management of common diseases

PRINCIPLES (METHODS) OF COMMUNICABLE DISEASE CONTROL

Methods of Communicable Disease Control

Communicable disease can be controlled and eradicated from the community. When thinking
about the control of diseases it is always good to think of all the possible methods. In most cases
one or two specific methods will have the greatest effect and should be the focus of your activity,
in other cases some methods will be useless against the disease. The aim of control is to tip the
balance against the agent.

The control and eradication of communicable diseases can be done by:
    Attacking the source of the disease causing organism
    Interrupting the transmission route
    Protecting the susceptible host
a) Attacking the Source

There are various specific measures which can be used to control the spread of an infectious
disease.

They include:

    Treating the infected person or animal with the appropriate antibiotics that destroy the
       disease causing-organism.
    Treating the carriers and sub-clinical cases after carrying out screening tests among
       suspected individuals or groups.
    Treating specific groups of persons who are at high risk of being infected (mass
       treatment). This is called chemoprophylaxis.
    Isolating those persons who are infected with highly infectious diseases such as ebola,
       marburg fever, lassa fever; so as to prevent the spread of the organism to other healthy
       people.
    Treating sick animals such as cattle suffering from brucellosis, immunizing animals
       such as cows from anthrax, and dogs from rabies; killing sick animals such as rats to
       control plague and dogs to prevent rabies; separating humans from animals.
    Notifying the local health authorities immediately you suspect a patient is suffering
       from an infectious disease.
    Though this does not directly affect the source, it is an essential way of keeping watch
       on the number of new cases and thereby monitoring the effectiveness of the control
       programme.
    All of the methods mentioned on the previous page are methods of controlling the
       reservoir - where an animal is the reservoir.

In summary you can state that the measures for attacking the source are:
      Treating the infected person/s
      Treating the carrier
      Mass treatment of persons at risk
      Isolating the infected person/s
      Treating the sick animal such as cows
      Immunizing animals such as dogs and cattle
      Killing the animal reservoir such as rats
      Separating humans and animals
b) Interrupting the Transmission Cycle

A number of methods are used to interrupt the transmission cycle. They include the following:
      Personal hygiene
      Environmental health
      Water and sanitation
      Vector control
      Good and adequate housing
      Effective food handling and adequate nutrition

NB: Sterilization of medical equipment and the use of sterile surgical equipment (These methods
are useful for interrupting the transmission of diseases such as, Human Immunodeficiency Virus
(HIV) infection and hepatitis-B infection.

Remember: A clean environment and good personal hygiene are the most important measures
in the primary prevention of diseases.

c) Protecting the Host

This is the third principle of controlling the spread of communicable disease in the community.
Any person who is not yet infected by a specific disease-causing organism is known as a
susceptible host. This is because they are at risk of contracting the infection. All susceptible
hosts must be protected from contracting the infection
Remember: The most effective way of controlling communicable diseases is to use a
combination of methods: attacking the source of the infecting organism, interrupting the
route of transmission, and protecting the susceptible host.

Basic management of common diseases

There are various specific and general measures for protecting the host.

Specific Measures

      Immunization using vaccines such as the KEPI vaccine
      Chemoprophylaxis using for example:
      Proguanil (PaludrineR) to suppress malaria parasites
      Tetracycline during cholera outbreaks
      Cotrimoxazole during plague Outbreaks

General Measures

      Use of barriers such as bed nets, gowns, gloves to prevent insect bites (especially
       mosquitoes)
      Use of chemicals for example insect repellents to prevent mosquito bites
      Wearing shoes to prevent penetration by hookworms from the soil
      Adequate housing to reduce overcrowding
      Improved nutrition
      Adequate ventilation
      Health education

Other Control Measures

There are other useful measures that can be taken to control the spread of communicable disease.
Among these is the notification of disease. Notification requires you to keep watch
(surveillance) on the number of new cases of communicable diseases in your area of work and
to immediately inform the local health authority when you come across a patient suffering from
an infectious disease. One of the main reasons for notification is to help the health authorities
take measures to confirm your suspicion and to control the spread of the disease. Notification
of infectious communicable diseases is the responsibility of all health care workers. It is also a
legal requirement according to the Public Health Act, Chapter (cap) 242; section eight of the
laws of Kenya.

Remember: It is your responsibility to notify your local health authority immediately should
you suspects the presence of an infectious disease.

Notifiable Diseases in Kenya

                       1. Plague
                       2. Cholera
                       3. Measles
                       4. Poliomyelitis
                       5. Diphtheria
                       6. Tuberculosis
                       7. Yellow fever
                       8. Anthrax
                       9. Trypanasomiasis
                       10. Typhoid fever
                       11. Whooping cough
                       12. Meningococcal meningitis
                       13. Rabies
                       14. Yellow fever

The diseases spread so quickly that they need international control measures. These diseases are
reported by the Ministry of Health to the World Health Organization (WHO).

Application of Communicable Disease Control Measures

The actual application of the control methods you have just seen can be undertaken by different
groups of people and institutions at various levels. These include individuals and village level,
dispensary and health centre level and the district and central government (Ministry of Health)
level.

Remember: A successful communicable disease control program is the one that involves
members of the community.

Learning Activities

Group discussions

Practical activities

Task: S ward in Y Sub County has been the most affected area with Communicable and non-
communicable disease cases and high mortality rate. You have been assigned as the community
health worker of that particular area. Carry out a survey on how you will curb that problem
and improve the health standards of that community.

A case study

Typhoid fever is a disease that manifests clinically with high fever and headache. Suppose
Abebe is infected with the infectious agent of typhoid fever, but he has no manifestations of the
disease. He works in a cafe and among 20 people he served in one day, five got infected, but
only three of these developed the disease. Among the three who developed typhoid fever, two
recovered and one died.

What are the likely modes of transmission?

Which of the affected persons are active cases and which are carriers?

Can you group the 20 people who were served in the cafe into the four stages of the natural
history of a communicable disease?

Self-Assessment

Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials
      Internet
      Telephone/Computers /laptops
      Stationery
      Experts from the industry
      standard manuals
      Writing materials
      Stationery
      Training manuals




                                      CHAPTER FOUR

                         PROVISION OF FIRST AID SERVICES




Unit of learning code HE/CU/TT/CC/04/6/A

Related Unit of Competency in Occupational Standard: Provide First Aid Services and CPR

4.1 Introduction to the unit of learning

This unit specifies the competencies required to provide first aid. It involves providing cardio-
pulmonary resuscitation; managing choking, burns, scalds, trauma, nose bleeding, cuts,
  fractures, drowning, poisoning and snake bites. It also involves assisting patients with existing
  conditions such as asthma, epilepsy and diabetes.

  Summary of Learning Outcomes

  1.        Assess the nature and extent of injury or illness

  2.        Provide first aid intervention

  3.        Evaluate first aid intervention

  4.        Wind-up first aid intervention

Learning Outcome 1: Assess the nature and extent of injury or illness

  Introduction to the learning outcome

  This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to assess the nature and
  extent of injury or illness. It includes principles of first aid, scene size up, assessment of nature
  and extent of injury and /or illness, sourcing for emergency services, decision making-triaging
  and requirements for first aid. Effective assessment of the nature and extent of injury or illness
  reduces the mortality rate by 75% in most of emergency cases.




  Performance Standard
       i.     Assessed personal, casualty and environment safety as per principles of first aid.
    ii.       Assessed the nature and extent of injury and /or illness in accordance to first aid
              principles.
   iii.       Called assistance from emergency services as per first aid principles.
   iv.        Made a decision promptly regarding action to be taken.
    v.        Identified tools, equipment, materials and supplies required based on the assessment
              carried out.
 vi.      Gathered tools, equipment, materials and supplies based on the assessment of the
          situation.

Information Sheet

Definition of Terms

Casualty- the department of a hospital providing immediate treatment for emergency cases

First Aid- is the first and immediate assistance given to any person suffering from either a minor
or serious illness or injury, with care provided to preserve life, prevent the condition from
worsening, or to promote recovery

Emergency services- are the public organizations whose job is to take quick action to deal with
emergencies when they occur, especially the fire brigade, the police, and the ambulance service.

Injury- also known as physical trauma is damage to the body caused by external force. This may
be caused by accidents, falls, hits, weapons, and other causes.

Principles of first aid
       1. Preserve Life

The first aim of first aid is to preserve life, which involves the key emergency practices to ensure
that the casualty isn’t in any mortal danger. Remember though, this includes preserving your
own life as you shouldn’t put yourself in danger in order to apply first aid. It’s at this stage where
you should do a quick risk assessment to check for dangers to the injured person, yourself or
bystanders which could cause the situation to escalate. If in doubt, do not attempt to apply first
aid and immediately call for a medical professional.

       2. Prevent Deterioration

Once you’ve followed all the steps associated with the first principle, your next priority is to
prevent deterioration of the injured person’s condition. Keeping a casualty still to avoid
aggravating their injury, or from complicating any unseen issues, is crucial. This helps prevent
to further injuries, and clearing the area of any immediate dangers will help you to do so.

   3. Promote Recovery

Finally, there are steps you should follow which will help lessen the amount of time taken for a
casualty to recover from an accident and aid in minimizing lasting damage and scarring. The
prime example of this is applying cold water to a burn as soon as possible to lower the chance
of long-term scarring and helps speed up the healing process.
Scene Size-up

The scene size-up is performed as units first approach their call. While the activity is part of
most EMS training programs, it is often limited to the student asking: "I perform my scene size-
up, what do I see?" and then being given answers by a well-meaning instructor looking to move
the scenario along to the "important clinical part."

On the job, very few calls present consequences for the responder if a thorough scene size-up is
not performed; as a result, providers become complacent and out of practice. All skills in
medicine fade with disuse and many providers weren’t proficient at a scene size-up to begin
with. More often than not, a cursory size-up is performed and rarely is it communicated to other
responding units.




Here are five tips for a more effective scene size-up to inform other EMS providers and initiate
effective incident management.

PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT

Standardization is one of the common ways to increase safety and reduce the chance of an error.
Many new EMS providers are advised to perform their history and physical exam the same way
every time to reduce the chance of missing a portion of the assessment.
Figure 1: What are your scene size-up tips?

https://media.cdn.lexipol.com/article-images/fb-
2ems1dblrslv.jpg?w=300&format=jpg&quality=87&crop=0%2C0%2C420%2C360

COMMUNICATE EARLY, COMMUNICATE OFTEN

As a general rule, EMS providers entered the industry to care for the sick and injured. As a
result, on scenes where a size-up is most important, there are likely one or more patients who
could really use your help. There is a drive among EMS providers to render aid as quickly as
possible and while that goal is admirable it can get you into trouble.




SAFETY FIRST

Among the other often-recited phrases in EMS education is "scene safety, BSI." Think about all
of the nearly automatic ways EMS providers protect themselves on a daily basis. Crews
generally park at an accident scene so that a wayward driver would strike a heavy and
unoccupied fire engine before the crews or the ambulance. In the winter, you may back up a
patient’s driveway so that you don’t have to navigate a loaded gurney down a sheet of ice to the
ambulance.

A WAY IN AND A WAY OUT

Identifying ingress and egress route serves both as a convenience and as a means to ensure
provider safety. On a standard call, your ingress route is generally whatever street you happened
to be driving down to get to the address and your egress route is simply continuing down that
street but with a patient on board. In some cases, however, establishing ingress and egress routes
may occur in conjunction with fire and law enforcement colleagues and communicating that to
other units could be the difference between a successful or unsuccessful incident.

ASK FOR HELP

This tip actually serves two purposes. On scene when performing the size-up, close your initial
communication to dispatch with a request for resources based on the estimated number and
severity of patients. This means that you may cancel or downgrade responding units later as
triage continues. Nothing confuses a request for resources more quickly than asking for "one
more ambulance" several times in quick succession. You will lose track of what you’ve asked
for and what is on the way and so will dispatch.




Assessment of nature and extent of injury and /or illness

Assessment of Injuries

The TOTAPS method (Talk, Observe, Touch, Active movement, Passive Movement, Skills
Test) is an effective way to assess the nature and extent of an injury to a player and make a
decision as to whether or not the athlete who is injured can resume playing.
Talk: The athlete should be asked a range of questions to establish what happened and how they
were feeling. Potential questions include: Where is the pain? Did you hear anything? What
happened to cause it? Is this the first time this has happened?

Observe: The injured site must be carefully inspected identify any signs of swelling and
deformity. It can help to compare the injured site to the other side of the body. (E.g., compare
one ankle to the other, to assess an ankle injury). Signs of deformity or swelling are an indication
of either soft or hard tissue damage, which means further assessment and treatment from a
professional is required.

Touch: If observation fails to yield results the next step involves feeling around the injured site
to identify any deformity or swelling. Gentle pressure should be applied from the outside of the
injury before slowly working in.

Active Movement: The athlete will need to test movement around the injured site by performing
actions such as flexion, extension and rotation to determine whether the mobility of the joint has
been affected. If there is no pain whilst the athlete is performing the movement by themselves
then they need to complete an isometric contraction before the athlete can move ahead to the
last step. If the assessor feels that the athlete does not have a full range of movement, they should
progress to the next stage.

Passive Movement: If full range of movement is not evident, the assessor or sports trainer needs
to physically mobilize the joint to test the range of motion and identify any instability and painful
areas. The athlete must be watched to see if they exhibit signs of discomfort.

Skills Test: The final stage requires the athlete to complete sport specific movements that mimic
those which are performed during the game. For example, walking, jogging, side stepping,
changing direction and jumping. If the athlete can complete these and the assessor is satisfied,
then they can return to play. During this test the assessor must watch the athlete for any signs of
discomfort or favor towards one side. At this stage, strapping may be used to reinforce the
injured site.
The athlete must complete and pass all assessment procedures in order to be considered fit
enough to return to the playing field.

If the athlete is unable to complete any of the requirements from TOTAPS, then they should be
referred to a medical professional for further treatment. The assessment of the injury can be
stopped at any time if it is evident that the athlete is feeling pain and cannot return to the field.




Sourcing for emergency services

When an emergency hits, simplified emergency procurement policies and procedures should be
enacted to ensure that procurement can be fast enough to meet the emergency needs while also
ensuring adequate levels of accountability.

Lessons learned have consistently demonstrated that in the first stages of an emergency, regular
organization procurement procedures are overly cumbersome or inadequate to deal with the fast-
paced and urgent demands required for emergency procurement. Simplified procedures must be
put in place for the emergency period, or considerable slowing of the procurement process will
result, which will delay the entire relief effort.

Decisions about what modifications to procedures will be applied in an emergency should
ideally be addressed through the EPP process and be able to be activated immediately when an
emergency is declared. The most effective organizations are those that already have emergency
procedures documented as part of their regular policies, and they simply need to activate them
at the time the emergency is declared.

Decision making-Triaging




Patient triage in Accident and Emergency departments requires emergency nurses to make rapid
decisions based on their knowledge and experiences. The development of triage decision-
making skills can be addressed through the use of simulations, 'thinking aloud' technique,
reflection and the decision rules of experienced emergency nurses. Clinical educators and
experienced emergency nurse mentors are encouraged to recognize that skill acquisition in triage
decision making requires practice before registered nurses can engage fully in the process of
triaging patients in the emergency department. It is essential to experience the process of triage
decision making in order to develop an understanding of the clinical information attended to,
the sequence in which the information is processed and the rules used to combine information
leading to a decision on the triage category for each patient. By using triage simulations
developed from 'real triage cases' the process of decision making can be experienced by nurses.
Further, if these simulations are accompanied by the collection of verbal protocols, nurses have
opportunities retrospectively to explore their decision making with reflection. In addition, the
presentation and use of decision rules used by experienced triage nurses can enhance the
development of skills in novice triage nurses.

Requirements for first aid
Figure 2: Workplace first aid kit

https://www.ishn.com/ext/resources/todaysnews2/first-aid-kit-
422.jpg?t=1424199076&width=696




IN EXERCISE of the powers conferred by section 55 of the Factories

Act, the Minister for Labor after consulting the Labor Advisory Board

hereby makes the following Rules:-




THE FACTORIES (FIRST-AID) RULES

In every factory there shall be provided, maintained and readily available and accessible in every
first aid box or cupboard required under section 50(1) of the Act items in accordance with the
following –

In every factory in which the number of employees does not exceed ten—
   1) a copy of the first-aid leaflet (L.D. 250/1) issued by the Labor Department;
   2) a sufficient number (not less than six) of small sterilized unmediated dressings for
       injured fingers;
   3) a sufficient number (not less than three) of medium sized sterilized unmediated
       dressing for injured hands or feet;
   4) a sufficient number (not less than three) of large sterilized unmediated dressings for
       other injured parts;
   5) a sufficient number (not less than twelve) of adhesive wound dressings of a suitable
       type and of assorted sizes;
   6) a sufficient number (not less than two) of triangular bandages of unbleached calico, the
       longest side of which measures not less than one hundred and thirty centimeters and
       each of the other sides not less than ninety-one centimeters.;
7) a sufficient supply of adhesive plaster;
8) a sufficient supply of absorbent sterilized cotton wool in fourteen gramme packets;
9) a sufficient supply of Factory Eye Drops, B.P.C.;
10) a sufficient number (not less two) of sterilized eye pads in separate sealed packets;
11) a tourniquet; and a sufficient supply of safety pins;
12) in every factory in which the number of employees exceeds ten but does not exceed
   fifty--
13) a copy of the first-aid leaflet (L.D. 250/1) issued by the Labor Department;
14) a sufficient number (not less than twelve) of small sterilized unmediated dressings for
   injured fingers;
15) A sufficient number (not less than six) of medium sized sterilized unmediated dressing
   for injured hands or feet.
16) a sufficient number (not less than six) of large sterilized unmediated dressings for other
   injured parts;
17) a sufficient number (not less than twenty four) of adhesive wound dressings of a
   suitable type and of assorted sizes;
18) a sufficient number (not less than four) of triangular bandages of unbleached calico, the
   longest side of which measures not less than one hundred and thirty centimeters and
   each of the other sides not less than ninety-one centimeters;
19) a sufficient supply of adhesive plaster;
20) a sufficient supply of absorbent sterilized cotton wool in fourteen gram packets;
21) a sufficient supply of Factory Eye Drops
22) a sufficient number (not less four) of sterilized eye pads in separate sealed packets;
23) a tourniquet; and a sufficient supply of safety pins
24) in every factory in which the number of employees exceeds fifty--
25) a copy of the first-aid leaflet (L.D. 250/1) issued by the Labor Department;
26) a sufficient number (not less than twenty four) of small sterilized unmediated dressings
   for injured fingers;
27) A sufficient number (not less than twelve) of medium sized sterilized unmediated
   dressing for injured hands or feet.
   28) a sufficient number (not less than twelve) of large sterilized unmediated dressings for
       other injured parts;
   29) a sufficient number (not less than thirty six) of adhesive wound dressings of a suitable
       type and of assorted sizes;
   30) a sufficient number (not less than eight) of triangular bandages of unbleached calico,
       the longest side of which measures not less than one hundred and thirty centimeters
       and of the other sides not less than ninety-one centimeters;
   31) a sufficient supply of adhesive plaster;
   32) a sufficient supply of absorbent sterilized cotton wool in fourteen gram packets;
   33) a sufficient supply of Factory Eye Drops, B.P.C;
   34) a sufficient number (not less eight) of sterilized eye pads in separate sealed packets;
   35) a tourniquet; and a sufficient supply of safety pins;

All materials for drugs and dressings contained in first aid boxes or cupboards shall be those
designated in, and of a grade or quality not lower than the standards specified by the British
Pharmaceutical Codex or any supplement thereof.

Every first aid box or cupboard shall be plainly and clearly marked on the outside with the words
“FIRST AID”.

In every factory where there are more than ten but less than fifty employees, there shall be at
least to persons trained in first aid and at least one such person shall always be available in the
factory at all times during all working hours.

In every factory where there are more than fifty but less than one hundred employees there shall
be at least three persons trained in first aid and at least one such person shall always be available
in the factory at all times during all working hours.

In every factory where there are more than one hundred employees there shall be at least three
persons trained in first aid, plus one additional person for each extra hundred employees (or part
thereof ) beyond the first 100 employees, and two such trained persons shall always be available
in the factory at all times during working hours.
In every factory where more than five hundred persons are employed there shall be a first aid
room which shall always be open and manned by a trained nurse during working hours.

No person shall be placed in charge of a first aid box or cupboard unless he or she has received
adequate training in the application of first-aid to the injured persons and holds a certificate of
competence issued by –

The St. John Ambulance of the St. John Council of Kenya, or

The Kenya Red Cross Society, or

Such other body or society as may be approved from time to time, by the Labor Commissioner:

Provided that any certificate of competence issued in accordance with this paragraph shall be
valid for one year only and must be renewed annually.

The provisions of these Rules shall apply to both day and night shifts and during all hours a
factory is open.

Where offence is committed under these Rules, the owner or the occupier of the factory
concerned, as the case may be, shall be guilty of an offence and if the provisions of Part XI of
the Act as to offences, penalties (including the amounts thereof) and proceedings shall apply,
mutatis mutandis, to these Rules as if they were set out there in.




Learning Activities

Practical Activities

Effective assessment of nature and extent of injury or illness is vital in preserving life of the
casualties. Using the TOTAPS method demonstrate how you can assess the nature and extent of
an injury to a player and make a decision as to whether or not the athlete who is injured can
resume playing?
Self-Assessment
   You are provided with the following questions for self-assessment, attempt them and check your
   responses

  You will be required to provide first aid services to a variety of patient. What are the principles
  of first aid?

  What are the factors you need to consider for a more effective scene size-up to inform other
  emergency services providers and initiate effective incident management?

  You are the first to reach to the scene of a patient involved in trauma. Primary survey in the
  management of trauma involves?

  Sourcing for emergency services materials and equipment is very vital in the provision of
  emergency services. What is the importance of effective sourcing for emergency services
  materials and equipment?

  Patient triage in Accident and Emergency departments requires emergency nurses to make rapid
  decisions based on their knowledge and experiences. Why is effective rapid decision making by
  nurses working in the patient triage in accident and emergency departments very important in
  saving the lives of the casualties?

  According to the factories first aid rules, every factory in which the number of employees does
  not exceed ten should fulfill which requirements?

  According to the factories first aid rules, every factory in which the number of employees
  exceeds ten but does not exceed fifty should fulfill which requirements?

  Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials

  Casualty department

  Functional skills laboratory

  First aid kit
Emergency room

Emergency room standard manuals

Emergency trolley

First Aid Manual.

Tweezers

Alcohol Swabs

Antibiotic Ointment

Bandages

Gauze Pads

Medical Tape

Elastic Bandages

Pain relievers

Instant cold pack

Waste disposal bins

Personal protective equipment

Health workers

Presentation charts

Flip charts
4.2.1.5 References

Jevon, P. & Ewens, B. (2012) Monitoring the Critically Ill Patient, 3rd Edition, Wiley-
Blackwell, Oxford

Peitzman A.B., et al. (2012) The Trauma Manual, 2nd edition. Philadelphia, Pa., Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.

Rapid Response to Everyday Emergencies (2016) A Nurse's Guide. Philadelphia, Pa., Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.

Royal College of nursing (2017) Record Keeping: The Facts, RCN, viewed 28 May 2018,
https://www.rcn.org.uk/professional-development/publications/pub-006051




MODEL ANSWERS




Self-Assessment

You will be required to provide first aid services to a variety of patient. What are the principles
of first aid?

Preserve Life--The first aim of first aid is to preserve life, which involves the key emergency
practices to ensure that the casualty isn’t in any mortal danger.

Prevent Deterioration--Once you’ve followed all the steps associated with the first principle,
your next priority is to prevent deterioration of the injured person’s condition. Keeping a
casualty still to avoid aggravating their injury, or from complicating any unseen issues, is
crucial.
Promote Recovery--Finally, there are steps you should follow which will help lessen the amount
of time taken for a casualty to recover from an accident and aid in minimizing lasting damage
and scarring.

What are the factors you need to consider for a more effective scene size-up to inform other
emergency services providers and initiate effective incident management?

Practice makes perfect--Standardization is one of the common ways to increase safety and
reduce the chance of an error. Many new emergency service providers are advised to perform
their history and physical exam the same way every time to reduce the chance of missing a
portion of the assessment.

Communicate early, communicate often—Early and often communication by the emergency
service providers about the scene size up help to secure the emergency scene and reduce
significantly morbidity and mortality rate of the casualties.

Safety first-- Among the other often-recited phrases in emergency service education is "scene
safety." Think about all of the nearly automatic ways emergency service providers protect
themselves on a daily basis.

A way in and a way out-- Identifying ingress and egress route serves both as a convenience and
as a means to ensure provider safety. On a standard call, your ingress route is generally whatever
street you happened to be driving down to get to the address and your egress route is simply
continuing down that street but with a patient on board.

Ask for help-- This tip actually serves two purposes. On scene when performing the size-up,
close your initial communication to dispatch with a request for resources based on the estimated
number and severity of patients. This means that you may cancel or downgrade responding units
later as triage continues. Nothing confuses a request for resources more quickly than asking for
"one more ambulance" several times in quick succession. You will lose track of what you’ve
asked for and what is on the way and so will dispatch.
You are the first to reach to the scene of a patient involved in trauma. Primary survey in the
management of trauma involves?

Airway-- open the patient's airway using a jaw-thrust maneuver with manual, in-line
stabilization of the neck. If you find food, blood, vomitus, or other debris, suction the airway
quickly to prevent aspiration. To better remove secretions, you may need to carefully logroll the
patient to his side. Manually stabilize his neck and spine as you do so.

Breathing-- Note respiratory rate and depth, chest expansion, and accessory muscle use and
auscultate breath sounds bilaterally. Also palpate for crepitus or subcutaneous air in the neck
and chest, which can indicate a pneumothorax or airway injury.

Circulation--Once you've assessed and supported your patient's breathing, attend to his
circulatory status. Assess for the presence and quality of peripheral pulses to quickly estimate
blood pressure

Disability--To evaluate disability, you'll evaluate the patient's LOC, pupil response, and gross
sensorimotor function. To document his baseline LOC, quickly assess and record an initial GCS
score.

Exposure--The final component of the primary survey is exposure. Remove the patient's clothing
completely so you can inspect his entire body for injuries. Use good judgment when removing
clothing; trying to remove a shirt by pulling or manipulating it may worsen the injury or pain.
Cutting clothing away with trauma shears is usually best.

Sourcing for emergency services materials and equipment is very vital in the provision of
emergency services. What is the importance of effective sourcing for emergency services
materials and equipment?

When an emergency hits, simplified emergency procurement policies and procedures should be
enacted to ensure that procurement can be fast enough to meet the emergency needs while also
ensuring adequate levels of accountability.
Lessons learned have consistently demonstrated that in the first stages of an emergency, regular
organization procurement procedures are overly cumbersome or inadequate to deal with the fast-
paced and urgent demands required for emergency procurement. Simplified procedures must be
put in place for the emergency period, or considerable slowing of the procurement process will
result, which will delay the entire relief effort.

Decisions about what modifications to procedures will be applied in an emergency should
ideally be addressed through the emergency procurement procedures process and be able to be
activated immediately when an emergency is declared. The most effective organizations are
those that already have emergency procedures documented as part of their regular policies, and
they simply need to activate them at the time the emergency is declared.

Patient triage in Accident and Emergency departments requires emergency nurses to make rapid
decisions based on their knowledge and experiences. Why is effective rapid decision making by
nurses working in the patient triage in accident and emergency departments very important in
saving the lives of the casualties?

The development of triage decision-making skills can be addressed through the use of
simulations, 'thinking aloud' technique, reflection and the decision rules of experienced
emergency nurses.

Clinical educators and experienced emergency nurse mentors are encouraged to recognize that
skill acquisition in triage decision making requires practice before registered nurses can engage
fully in the process of triaging patients in the emergency department.

It is essential to experience the process of triage decision making in order to develop an
understanding of the clinical information attended to, the sequence in which the information is
processed and the rules used to combine information leading to a decision on the triage category
for each patient.

By using triage simulations developed from 'real triage cases' the process of decision making
can be experienced by nurses.
Further, if these simulations are accompanied by the collection of verbal protocols, nurses have
opportunities retrospectively to explore their decision making with reflection.

In addition, the presentation and use of decision rules used by experienced triage nurses can
enhance the development of skills in novice triage nurses.

According to the factories first aid rules, every factory in which the number of employees does
not exceed ten should fulfill which requirements?

a copy of the first-aid leaflet (L.D. 250/1) issued by the Labor Department;

a sufficient number (not less than six) of small sterilized unmediated dressings for injured
fingers;

a sufficient number (not less than three) of medium sized sterilized unmediated dressing for
injured hands or feet;

a sufficient number (not less than three) of large sterilized unmediated dressings for other injured
parts;

a sufficient number (not less than twelve) of adhesive wound dressings of a suitable type and of
assorted sizes;

a sufficient number (not less than two) of triangular bandages of unbleached calico, the longest
side of which measures not less than one hundred and thirty centimeters and each of the other
sides not less than ninety-one centimeters.;

a sufficient supply of adhesive plaster;

a sufficient supply of absorbent sterilized cotton wool in fourteen gramme packets;

a sufficient supply of Factory Eye Drops, B.P.C.;

a sufficient number (not less two) of sterilized eye pads in separate sealed packets;
a tourniquet; and a sufficient supply of safety pins;

According to the factories first aid rules, every factory in which the number of employees
exceeds ten but does not exceed fifty should fulfill which requirements?

a copy of the first-aid leaflet (L.D. 250/1) issued by the Labor Department;

a sufficient number (not less than twelve) of small sterilized unmediated dressings for injured
fingers;

A sufficient number (not less than six) of medium sized sterilized unmediated dressing for
injured hands or feet.

a sufficient number (not less than six) of large sterilized unmediated dressings for other injured
parts;

a sufficient number (not less than twenty four) of adhesive wound dressings of a suitable type
and of assorted sizes;

a sufficient number (not less than four) of triangular bandages of unbleached calico, the longest
side of which measures not less than one hundred and thirty centimeters and each of the other
sides not less than ninety-one centimeters;

a sufficient supply of adhesive plaster;

a sufficient supply of absorbent sterilized cotton wool in fourteen gram packets;

a sufficient supply of Factory Eye Drops

a sufficient number (not less four) of sterilized eye pads in separate sealed packets;

a tourniquet; and a sufficient supply of safety pins
  Learning Outcome 2: Provide first aid intervention

Introduction to the learning outcome

This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to provide first aid
interventions. It includes performing cardio- pulmonary resuscitation; management of: choking,
burns and scalds, trauma, nose bleeding, cuts, fractures, drowning, poisoning and snake bites,
assisting patients with medical conditions such as: asthma, epilepsy and diabetes, effective
communication on casualty’s condition, handing over casualty to medical personnel and
monitoring Casualty’s condition.

Performance Standard
   i.   Gave specific first aid measures based on nature and extent of injury/illness
  ii.   Monitored casualty’s condition continuously based on the vital signs
 iii.   Conveyed information on the casualty condition accurately and clearly to emergency
        services personnel
 iv.    Handed over the casualty to the emergency and appropriate medical personnel

Information Sheet

Definition of Terms

Cardio- pulmonary resuscitation- Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) is an emergency
procedure that combines chest compressions often with artificial ventilation in an effort to
manually preserve intact brain function until further measures are taken to restore spontaneous
blood circulation and breathing in a person who is in cardiac arrest.

Casualty- the department of a hospital providing immediate treatment for emergency cases
First Aid- is the first and immediate assistance given to any person suffering from either a minor
or serious illness or injury, with care provided to preserve life, prevent the condition from
worsening, or to promote recovery

Emergency services- are the public organizations whose job is to take quick action to deal with
emergencies when they occur, especially the fire brigade, the police, and the ambulance service.

Injury- also known as physical trauma is damage to the body caused by external force. This may
be caused by accidents, falls, hits, weapons, and other causes.

Performing cardio- pulmonary resuscitation

Using the CPR steps on someone who is not breathing can help keep them alive until the
emergency services arrive.

CPR works by keeping a person’s blood flowing until healthcare professionals can help them.
People without first aid training can still save a life by using the CPR steps.

When a person initiates CPR immediately after someone’s heart stops beating, CPR can double
or even triple the chances of them surviving.

CPR step-by-step

There are two main stages to CPR: the preparation stage and the CPR stage.

Preparation steps

Before performing CPR on an adult, use the following preparation steps:




Step 1 Call 911
First, check the scene for factors that could put you in danger, such as traffic, fire, or falling
masonry. Next, check the person. Do they need help? Tap their shoulder and shout, “Are you
OK?”

If they are not responding, call 911 or ask a bystander to call 911 before performing CPR. If
possible, ask a bystander to go and search for an AED machine. People can find these in offices
and many other public buildings.




Step 2 Place the person on their back and open their airway

Place the person carefully on their back and kneel beside their chest. Tilt their head back slightly
by lifting their chin.

Open their mouth and check for any obstruction, such as food or vomit. Remove any obstruction
if it is loose. If it is not loose, trying to grasp it may push it farther into the airway.




Step 3 Check for breathing

Place your ear next the person’s mouth and listen for no more than 10 seconds. If you do not
hear breathing, or you only hear occasional gasps, begin CPR.

If someone is unconscious but still breathing, do not perform CPR. Instead, if they do not seem
to have a spinal injury, place them in the recovery position. Keep monitoring their breathing and
perform CPR if they stop breathing.




CPR steps

Use the following steps to perform CPR:
Step 4 Perform 30 chest compressions

Place one of your hands on top of the other and clasp them together. With the heel of the hands
and straight elbows, push hard and fast in the center of the chest, slightly below the nipples.

Push at least 2 inches deep. Compress their chest at a rate of least 100 times per minute. Let the
chest rise fully between compressions.




Figure 3: Chest compressions techniques

https://cdn-prod.medicalnewstoday.com/content/images/articles/324/324712/chest-
compressions-in-cpr-visual-guide-infographic.jpg
Step 5 Perform two rescue breaths

Making sure their mouth is clear, tilt their head back slightly and lift their chin. Pinch their nose
shut, place your mouth fully over theirs, and blow to make their chest rise.

If their chest does not rise with the first breath, retilt their head. If their chest still does not rise
with a second breath, the person might be choking.




      Figure 4: Rescue breaths




https://cdn-prod.medicalnewstoday.com/content/images/articles/324/324712/cpr-rescue-
breaths-visual-guide-illustration.jpg
Step 6 Repeat

Repeat the cycle of 30 chest compressions and two rescue breaths until the person starts
breathing or help arrives. If an AED arrives, carry on performing CPR until the machine is set
up and ready to use.




Figure 5: How to Do CPR - Step by Step Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation




https://www.trainingexpress.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/How-to-Do-CPR-Step-1-
e1581920675299.jpg
Management of: Choking




Choking happens when someone's airway suddenly gets blocked, either fully or partly, so they
can't breathe.

This information applies to adults and children over 1 year old.

Mild choking: encourage them to cough

If the airway is only partly blocked, the person will usually be able to speak, cry, cough or
breathe.

They'll usually be able to clear the blockage themselves.

To help with mild choking in an adult or child over 1 year old:

encourage them to keep coughing to try to clear the blockage

ask them to try to spit out the object if it's in their mouth

don't put your fingers in their mouth to help them as they may bite you accidentally

If coughing doesn't work, start back blows.

Severe choking: back blows and abdominal thrusts

Where choking is severe, the person won't be able to speak, cry, cough or breathe. Without help,
they'll eventually become unconscious.

To carry out a back blow on an adult or child over 1 year old:
Stand behind them and slightly to one side. Support their chest with 1 hand. Lean them forward
so the object blocking their airway will come out of their mouth, rather than moving further
down.

Give up to 5 sharp blows between their shoulder blades with the heel of your hand. The heel is
between the palm of your hand and your wrist.

Check if the blockage has cleared.

If not, give up to 5 abdominal thrusts.

Abdominal thrusts

Don't give abdominal thrusts to babies under 1 year old or pregnant women.

To carry out an abdominal thrust:

Stand behind the person who's choking.

Place your arms around their waist and bend them forward.

Clench 1 fist and place it right above their belly button.

Put the other hand on top of your fist and pull sharply inwards and upwards.

Repeat this movement up to 5 times.

If the person's airway is still blocked after trying back blows and abdominal thrusts, get help
immediately:

Call 999 and ask for an ambulance. Tell the 999 operator the person is choking.

Continue with the cycles of 5 back blows and 5 abdominal thrusts until help arrives.

If they lose consciousness and aren't breathing, you should begin cardiopulmonary resuscitation
(CPR) with chest compressions.
Complications of Choking

Get urgent medical help at an A&E, NHS walk-in centre or a GP if:

they have a persistent cough after choking

they feel something is still stuck in their throat

Abdominal thrusts can cause serious injuries. A health professional such as your GP or a doctor
in A&E should always examine someone after they have received abdominal thrusts.




Management of Burns and Scalds




About burns and scalds
Figure 6: Burns and Scalds

https://assets.nhs.uk/nhsuk-cms/images/C0034381.width-320.jpg

Burns and scalds are damage to the skin caused by heat. Both are treated in the same way.

A burn is caused by dry heat – by an iron or fire, for example. A scald is caused by something
wet, such as hot water or steam.

Burns can be very painful and may cause:

red or peeling skin

blisters

swelling

white or charred skin

The amount of pain you feel isn't always related to how serious the burn is. Even a very serious
burn may be relatively painless.

Treating burns and scalds

To treat a burn, follow the first aid advice below:

immediately get the person away from the heat source to stop the burning

cool the burn with cool or lukewarm running water for 20 minutes – don't use ice, iced water, or
any creams or greasy substances such as butter

remove any clothing or jewellery that's near the burnt area of skin, including babies' nappies -
but don't move anything that's stuck to the skin

make sure the person keeps warm – by using a blanket, for example, but take care not to rub it
against the burnt area
cover the burn by placing a layer of cling film over it – a clean plastic bag could also be used
for burns on your hand

use painkillers such as paracetamol or ibuprofen to treat any pain

if the face or eyes are burnt, sit up as much as possible, rather than lying down - this helps to
reduce swelling

The British Red Cross website has a video about first aid for burns.

When to get medical attention

Depending on how serious a burn is, it may be possible to treat it at home. For minor burns,
keep the burn clean and don't burst any blisters that form.

More serious burns require professional medical attention. You should go to a hospital A&E
department for:

all chemical and electrical burns

large or deep burns – any burn bigger than your hand

burns that cause white or charred skin – any size

burns on the face, hands, arms, feet, legs or genitals that cause blisters

If someone has breathed in smoke or fumes, they should also seek medical attention. Some
symptoms may be delayed and can include:

coughing

a sore throat

difficulty breathing

facial burns
People at greater risk from the effects of burns, such as children under five years old and
pregnant women, should also get medical attention after a burn or scald.

The size and depth of the burn will be assessed and the affected area cleaned before a dressing
is applied. In severe cases, skin graft surgery may be recommended.

Types of burn

Burns are assessed by how seriously your skin is damaged and which layers of skin are affected.
Your skin has three layers:

the epidermis – the outer layer of skin

the dermis – the layer of tissue just beneath, which contains blood capillaries, nerve endings,
sweat glands and hair follicles

the subcutaneous fat, or subcutis – the deeper layer of fat and tissue

There are four main types of burn, which tend to have a different appearance and different
symptoms:

superficial epidermal burn – where the epidermis is damaged; your skin will be red, slightly
swollen and painful, but not blistered

superficial dermal burn – where the epidermis and part of the dermis are damaged; your skin
will be pale pink and painful, and there may be small blisters

deep dermal or partial thickness burn – where the epidermis and the dermis are damaged: this
type of burn makes your skin turn red and blotchy; your skin may be dry or moist, and become
swollen and blistered, and it may be very painful or painless

full thickness burn – where all three layers of skin (the epidermis, dermis and subcutis) are
damaged; the skin is often burnt away and the tissue underneath may appear pale or blackened,
while the remaining skin will be dry and white, brown or black with no blisters, and the texture
of the skin may also be leathery or waxy
Preventing burns and scalds

Many severe burns and scalds affect babies and young children. Examples of things you can do
to help reduce the likelihood of your child having a serious accident at home include:

keeping your child out of the kitchen whenever possible

testing the temperature of bath water using your elbow before you put your baby or toddler in
the bath

keeping matches, lighters and lit candles out of young children's sight and reach

keeping hot drinks well away from young children




Management of Trauma

Primary Survey: Managing immediate threats

By taking a standardized approach to assessment and treatment, the trauma team can address the
most significant risks to life first. As always, start with the ABCs.




Airway. The first part of the primary survey is always assessing the airway. This includes
checking for potential injury to the cervical spine. Until cervical spine injury has been ruled out,
open the patient's airway using a jaw-thrust maneuver with manual, in-line stabilization of the
neck. If you find food, blood, vomitus, or other debris, suction the airway quickly to prevent
aspiration. To better remove secretions, you may need to carefully logroll the patient to his side.
Manually stabilize his neck and spine as you do so.
Breathing. Assess your patient's breathing next. Note respiratory rate and depth, chest
expansion, and accessory muscle use and auscultate breath sounds bilaterally. Also palpate for
crepitus or subcutaneous air in the neck and chest, which can indicate a pneumothorax or airway
injury. Find out if he has pain with breathing or on palpation. Injuries that can impair ventilation
include rib fractures (especially a flail chest), a pneumothorax, a hemothorax, and spinal cord
or head trauma.




Supplemental oxygen is always indicated at this stage. For a spontaneously breathing patient, a
non-rebreather mask with the flow rate set at 12 to 15 liters/minute is appropriate. However, if
the patient isn't breathing well enough to sustain optimal oxygenation, begin manual bag-valve-
mask ventilation to support his ventilatory efforts until he can be intubated and mechanically
ventilated.




If the patient has severe respiratory distress and hypotension as well as unilateral decreased or
absent breath sounds, suspect a tension pneumothorax, a potentially fatal complication requiring
rapid treatment. To perform an emergency chest decompression, the trauma team physician will
perform a needle thoracostomy, inserting a 14-gauge I.V. catheter into the patient's chest at the
second intercostal space, midclavicular line on the affected side. A rush of air from the catheter
confirms the presence of a tension pneumothorax. The catheter is left in place until a chest tube
can be inserted.

In the meantime, a syringe or commercial Heimlich valve (or similar device) is attached to the
catheter hub so that air can escape without being drawn back into the chest. If available, have a
chest tube drainage system that can collect blood for autotransfusion on hand during chest tube
insertion, in case a hemothorax is present.

Circulation. Once you've assessed and supported your patient's breathing, attend to his
circulatory status. Assess for the presence and quality of peripheral pulses to quickly estimate
BP, as follows.
If he has a radial pulse, his systolic BP is at least 80 mm Hg.

If he's lost his radial pulse but still has a femoral pulse, he has a systolic BP of at least 70 mm
Hg.

If he lacks all pulses except a carotid pulse, he has a systolic BP of at least 60 mm Hg.

Note the patient's skin color and level of consciousness (LOC). Pallor and cold, clammy skin
indicate shock.

His LOC is an important indicator of cerebral perfusion. Agitation is common in the early stages
of shock. (Think of the "fight or flight" response.) As shock progresses, his LOC will decline
until he's unconscious.

Obtain a complete set of vital signs, including temperature, as soon as possible. Use this set of
vital signs as a baseline for comparison with subsequent measurements. You may need to take
vital signs every 5 to 15 minutes until the patient's condition improves.

A key part of your circulatory assessment is to identify and control hemorrhage. External
hemorrhage is usually, but not always, obvious. Logroll the patient to inspect his back and
buttocks for bleeding.




To control bleeding, apply direct pressure over the site of hemorrhage. If this isn't effective by
itself, apply pressure over the major arterial pulse point proximal to the bleeding site.

Use a tourniquet only if you must stanch severe hemorrhage in an extremity to save the patient's
life. Using a tourniquet puts the limb's viability at risk.

Next, ask yourself if the mechanism of injury makes internal hemorrhage likely. If the patient
has signs and symptoms of shock without visible bleeding, he may have an occult internal
hemorrhage that requires surgery.
Besides assessing and documenting his circulatory status, you may need to intervene to sustain
circulation. For a patient who's in shock, consider both noninvasive and invasive strategies to
support his BP. Keep him supine and elevate his legs 6 to 8 inches (15 to 20 cm) to promote
venous return and improve cardiac output. Don't put him in the Trendelenburg position because
this can cause his stomach to compress his diaphragm, impairing ventilation.

Make sure he has venous access with two large-bore I.V. catheters (ideally 14- to 16-gauge) to
facilitate rapid fluid and blood product administration if needed. Draw blood for lab analysis.
Send specimens for typing and crossmatching, complete blood cell count, serum glucose,
electrolytes, and a coagulation profile. Depending on the patient's condition and suspected
injuries, you may also need specimens for other studies, such as creatine kinase, amylase, and
serum lactate.

An arterial blood gas (ABG) analysis can help clinicians assess the patient's oxygenation status
and determine whether or not he's in shock. If ABG results show a base deficit that's greater
than 2 mEq/liter, suspect ongoing hemorrhage, internal injuries, or insufficient resuscitation.

As ordered, administer an appropriate crystalloid solution for I.V. volume replacement, such as
0.9% sodium chloride or lactated Ringer's solution. Warm the solution in a commercial fluid
warmer or use a high-volume infuser/warming device. Don't administer D5W for volume
replacement because the dextrose will be metabolized and leave free water, a hypotonic solution
that won't stay in the vascular space.

Provide 3 mL of crystalloid solution to replace each 1 mL of blood lost. If you infuse 2 liters of
crystalloid solution and the patient's BP hasn't returned to the normal range, be prepared to
administer blood products.

Typing and crossmatching typically take 30 to 40 minutes, which may be too long for a trauma
patient to wait. When immediate blood transfusion is needed, the only option is to give
uncrossmatched universal donor blood, as ordered. Give group O, Rh-negative packed red blood
cells (RBCs) to female patients of childbearing age or younger. Male patients and women who
can't become pregnant can receive group O, Rh-positive blood. Remember that 0.9% sodium
chloride is the only solution you can infuse in the same I.V. line as blood.
Disability--To evaluate disability, you'll evaluate the patient's LOC, pupil response, and gross
sensorimotor function. To document his baseline LOC, quickly assess and record an initial GCS
score. If possible, determine his GCS before he receives any drugs that could alter his LOC to
better enable you to predict his outcome. For example, if a patient's GCS score on arrival at the
hospital is 4, his prognosis for recovery is much worse than a patient whose initial score is 12.

Keep in mind that accurate scoring can be impaired by traumatic, toxic, and metabolic causes.
Even if the patient shows evidence of alcohol or drug use, never assume that his altered mental
status is due purely to intoxicants until injury and other medical causes are ruled out. (See Using
the Glasgow Coma Scale.)

Note whether the patient can recall the events surrounding the traumatic event. Amnesia about
the event suggests that he lost consciousness.

Next, assess his pupils for size, equality, shape, and response to light. Unequal or abnormal pupil
response can indicate direct ocular trauma or head injury and elevated intracranial pressure or
the effects of drugs, such as atropine (pupil dilation) or opioids (pupil constriction).

The final component of the disability evaluation is an assessment of gross sensorimotor function.
Try to determine if the patient has any numbness, tingling, or other abnormal sensations in his
body after the traumatic event and if he can move his limbs. Injuries to the extremities, spinal
cord, head, blood vessels, or nerves can cause sensorimotor deficits.

Exposure--The final component of the primary survey is exposure. Remove the patient's clothing
completely so you can inspect his entire body for injuries. Use good judgment when removing
clothing; trying to remove a shirt by pulling or manipulating it may worsen the injury or pain.
Cutting clothing away with trauma shears is usually best.

Once you've removed clothing, protect the patient from hypothermia, which is particularly
dangerous to any trauma patient because it impairs blood coagulation, interferes with
resuscitation efforts, and increases the risk of acidosis and death.

Take these measures to prevent heat loss and rewarm the patient.
Table 3: The Glasgow Coma Scale




https://biologydictionary.net/wp-content/uploads/2020/10/gcs.jpg
*Remove wet clothing and sheets. Cover the patient with warm blankets.

* Increase the room temperature to 75[degrees] F to 80[degrees] F (23.9[degrees] C to
26.7[degrees] C).

* Infuse only warm crystalloid solutions.

* Consider using commercial patient-warming devices, such as heat lights or temperature-
regulating blankets.

Secondary survey: Uncovering other serious threats

Once you've completed the primary survey and managed any immediate threats to the patient's
life, begin a secondary survey for injuries that could kill or disable him later. Start at his head
and assess him methodically, moving down his body systematically as you search for injuries.
Inspect for contusions, abrasions, lacerations, deformities, discoloration, edema, foreign bodies,
and other abnormalities.

Auscultate breath sounds and heart sounds. Assess all body areas to locate areas of pain or
tenderness, crepitus, deformity, loss of function, and the location and quality of pulses. If you
suspect he has a fracture of an arm or leg, assess the neurovascular status of the limb, then splint
it to prevent movement and decrease pain. Assess neurovascular status again after splinting.
Administer I.V. opioid analgesia as ordered and make sure that pain is managed optimally.

At this point, the trauma physician will consider ordering an indwelling urinary catheter to
accurately measure urinary output, an indication of renal perfusion, and to check for blood in
the urine. First, though, he'll perform a rectal examination to check for blood or evidence of
urethral injury, such as a high-riding prostate gland in a male patient. (If the urethra is injured,
the patient may need to have a suprapubic catheter inserted instead.)

Before inserting a urinary catheter, look for blood at the urethral meatus. If you see blood, notify
the physician and don't insert the catheter. The patient will need further diagnostic testing (for
instance, a retrograde urethrogram or cystogram) before a catheter can be safely inserted.
Figure 7: Responding to trauma: Your priorities in the first hour

https://www.nursingcenter.com/wkhlrp/handlers/Cv.png?key=article_TTU2_01244666-
200901000-00010

Reassess the patient's vital signs and GCS score as frequently as needed, depending on his
condition. Also try to obtain a more complete history from the patient or significant others. Use
the mnemonic "AMPLE" to help you remember the key information to gather. (See Get AMPLE
information.)

Assess carefully for medications the patient has taken that could affect his condition and
treatment. For example, taking an anticoagulant, such as warfarin, or a platelet inhibitor, such
as daily aspirin therapy, will make him much more prone to bleeding from his injuries. If he's
using any of these drugs, tell the health care provider immediately so that he can order
appropriate reversal agents or take measures to counteract anticoagulation effects.

Assess the patient for steroid use. If he's taking a steroid medication, he many need an I.V.
steroid bolus so that he can physiologically respond in a stress or shock state. If you don't know
the date of his last tetanus immunization or if it was more than 5 years ago, administer tetanus
prophylaxis.

Michael's secondary survey is remarkable for pain on palpation in his lumbar spine, tenderness
and abrasions over his left lower rib cage anteriorly, and heel pain and swelling in both feet.
You insert a urinary catheter and perform a dipstick urine test, which is positive for a small
amount of blood.




After the primary and secondary surveys are complete, prepare your patient for a series of X-
rays and scans. He'll have a stat portable chest X-ray to identify rib fractures or mediastinal or
diaphragmatic injury and to assess for a pneumothorax or hemothorax. He'll also need a cervical
spine X-ray series to check for cervical spine injury. The X-ray will also confirm the correct
position of chest and endotracheal tubes and central venous catheters. Depending on the results
of the primary and secondary surveys, he may have additional X-rays of the pelvis, spine,
extremities, or other areas.

He may have bedside ultrasonography with the focused abdominal sonography for trauma
(FAST) technique, which is used to rapidly examine all four abdominal quadrants and the
pericardium to identify the presence of free fluid, usually blood.

If he's lost consciousness or shows evidence of a head injury, he'll need a computed tomography
(CT) scan of his head. Other CT scans of the spine, chest, abdomen, or pelvis may be indicated
to help the health care provider plan treatment.

Your patient may need a vascular ultrasound or an arteriogram if he has vascular injuries,
decreased or absent pulses, evidence of limb ischemia, or a widened mediastinum, indicating a
possible aortic injury.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is rarely used for diagnosing acutely injured patients
because it takes too long and safely placing an injured patient into the MRI tube is difficult. In
addition, the patient might have ferrous metal in his body (for example, implants, or metal
fragments left in his eyes from industrial work). Any ferrous metal is dangerous in an MRI room
and is a contraindication for MRI.

However, the patient may need an MRI if he shows any evidence of an acute spinal cord injury.
Be sure to carefully assess him for ferrous metal objects. If they can be removed, do so before
taking him to the MRI. The technologist will ask him if he has any implants or fragments in his
eyes from metal work. If he does, an MRI is contraindicated.

Michael's diagnostic workup includes a bedside FAST examination; chest, pelvis, and lower
extremity X-rays; a full series of spinal X-rays; and CT scans of his chest, abdomen, and lumbar
spine. The tests identify these injuries: fractures of the 9th and 10th ribs on the left side, an L3
compression fracture, bilateral calcaneus fractures, a renal contusion, and a grade III spleen
injury.




Providing Definitive Care

The definitive care phase begins after the patient's injuries have been identified and initial
lifesaving interventions have been performed. If your hospital doesn't have the resources to
provide the care he needs, he may need to be transferred to a trauma center.

In a facility that can provide trauma management, the patient may go to the operating room,
intensive care unit (ICU), or a surgical unit after his trauma workup. Most patients go home after
discharge, but some require inpatient rehabilitation first.

In Michael's case, the surgeon admits him to the ICU for close monitoring and pain management.
She elects to manage his spleen injury nonoperatively because his vital signs normalized after
he received 2 liters of resuscitation fluids. His rib fractures and renal contusion require only
observation at this time. Orthopedic and spine surgeons are consulted to treat his calcaneus
fractures and L3 compression fracture.
Meeting the Standard of Care

Key outcome measures will help you to determine how well the patient has responded to
resuscitation and help you anticipate his needs. (See Adequate resuscitation? Watch for these
indicators.)

An organized team approach in the first hour after a traumatic injury provides fast, efficient
patient care and saves lives. Because you and other team members prioritized assessment and
interventions for Michael according to recognized standards of trauma care, you've given him
the best chance for survival and a full recovery.




Adequate Resuscitation? Watch for these indicators

Hemodynamic and renal parameters within normal limits

Core body temperature normal

Serum lactate less than 2 mmol/liter

No base deficit

Arterial pH of 7.35 to 7.45

Hemoglobin greater than 9 grams/dL (based on individual needs)

Ionized calcium within normal limits. (Blood transfusion can lower serum calcium because of
the calcium-binding effects of the citrate preservative in banked blood products.)

Serum potassium of 3.5 to 5.3 mEq/liter

Coagulation profile within normal limits

Pain under control
Management of Nose Bleeding




About nosebleeds




Figure 8: Nose Bleeds First Aid

https://ebgh.med.sa/wpcontent/uploads/2017/10/%D8%A7%D9%84%D8%B1%D8%B9%D8
%A7%D9%81-400x280.jpg?i=56491
Nosebleeds can be frightening, but they aren't usually a sign of anything serious and can often
be treated at home.

The medical name for a nosebleed is epistaxis.

During a nosebleed, blood flows from one or both nostrils. It can be heavy or light and last from
a few seconds to 15 minutes or more.

What to do

To stop a nosebleed:

sit down and firmly pinch the soft part of your nose, just above your nostrils, for at least 10-15
minutes

lean forward and breathe through your mouth – this will drain blood into your nose instead of
down the back of your throat

place an ice pack or bag of frozen vegetables covered by a towel on the bridge of your nose

stay upright, rather than lying down, as this reduces the blood pressure in the blood vessels of
your nose and will discourage further bleeding

If the bleeding eventually stops, you won't usually need to seek medical advice. However, in
some cases you may need further treatment from your doctor or in hospital (see below).

Read more about treating nosebleeds

When to seek medical advice

Contact your Doctor if:

you're taking a blood-thinning medicine (anticoagulant) such as warfarin or have a clotting
disorder such as haemophilia and the bleeding doesn't stop
you have symptoms of anaemia such as heart palpitations, shortness of breath and a pale
complexion

a child under two years of age has a nosebleed

you have nosebleeds that come and go regularly

Ask someone to drive you to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department or call
999 for an ambulance if:

the bleeding continues for longer than 20 minutes

the bleeding is heavy and you've lost a lot of blood

you're having difficulty breathing

you swallow a large amount of blood that makes you vomit

the nosebleed developed after a serious injury, such as a car crash

What causes nosebleeds?

The inside of your nose is full of tiny, delicate blood vessels that can become damaged and bleed
relatively easily.

Common causes of nosebleeds include:

picking your nose

blowing your nose very hard

a minor injury to your nose

changes in humidity or temperature causing the inside of the nose to become dry and cracked
Occasionally, bleeding can come from the blood vessels deeper within the nose. This can be
caused by a blow to the head, recent nasal surgery and hardened arteries (atherosclerosis).

Read more about the causes of nosebleeds

Who gets nosebleeds?

Nosebleeds are fairly common and most people will experience them every now and again.
Anyone can get a nosebleed, but they most often affect:

children between two and 10 years of age

elderly people

pregnant women

people who take blood thinning medication such as aspirin or anticoagulants, such as warfarin

people with blood clotting disorders, such as haemophilia

Bleeding may also be heavier or last longer if you take anticoagulants, have a blood clotting
disorder, or have high blood pressure (hypertension).

Are nosebleeds serious?

Nosebleeds aren't usually serious. However, frequent or heavy nosebleeds may indicate more
serious health problems, such as high blood pressure or a blood clotting disorder, and should be
checked.

Excessive bleeding over a prolonged period of time can also lead to further problems such as
anaemia.

If your GP suspects a more serious problem is causing your nosebleeds, they may refer you to
an ear, nose and throat (ENT) specialist for further tests.

Preventing nosebleeds
Things you can do to prevent nosebleeds include:

avoid picking your nose and keep your fingernails short

blow your nose as little as possible and only very gently

keep your home humidified

wear a head guard during activities in which your nose or head could get injured

always follow the instructions that come with nasal decongestants – overusing these can cause
nosebleeds

Talk to your doctor if you experience nosebleeds frequently and aren't able to prevent them.
They may refer you to an ENT specialist for an assessment.

Management of Cuts




These guidelines can help you care for minor cuts and scrapes:

Wash your hands. This helps avoid infection.

Stop the bleeding. Minor cuts and scrapes usually stop bleeding on their own. If needed, apply
gentle pressure with a clean bandage or cloth and elevate the wound until bleeding stops.

Clean the wound. Rinse the wound with water. Keeping the wound under running tap water will
reduce the risk of infection. Wash around the wound with soap. But don't get soap in the wound.
And don't use hydrogen peroxide or iodine, which can be irritating. Remove any dirt or debris
with a tweezers cleaned with alcohol. See a doctor if you can't remove all debris.

Apply an antibiotic or petroleum jelly. Apply a thin layer of an antibiotic ointment or petroleum
jelly to keep the surface moist and help prevent scarring. Certain ingredients in some ointments
can cause a mild rash in some people. If a rash appears, stop using the ointment.
Cover the wound. Apply a bandage, rolled gauze or gauze held in place with paper tape.
Covering the wound keeps it clean. If the injury is just a minor scrape or scratch, leave it
uncovered.

Change the dressing. Do this at least once a day or whenever the bandage becomes wet or dirty.

Get a tetanus shot. Get a tetanus shot if you haven't had one in the past five years and the wound
is deep or dirty.

Watch for signs of infection. See a doctor if you see signs of infection on the skin or near the
wound, such as redness, increasing pain, drainage, warmth or swelling.

Management of Fractures




Figure 9: Fracture First Aid

https://pbs.twimg.com/media/D7d_b2aW4AA_MKe.jpg
A fracture is a broken bone. It requires medical attention. If the broken bone is the result of
major trauma or injury, call 911 or your local emergency number.

Also call for emergency help if:

The person is unresponsive, isn't breathing or isn't moving. Begin CPR if there's no breathing or
heartbeat.

There is heavy bleeding.

Even gentle pressure or movement causes pain.

The limb or joint appears deformed.

The bone has pierced the skin.

The extremity of the injured arm or leg, such as a toe or finger, is numb or bluish at the tip.

You suspect a bone is broken in the neck, head or back.

Don't move the person except if necessary to avoid further injury. Take these actions
immediately while waiting for medical help:

Stop any bleeding. Apply pressure to the wound with a sterile bandage, a clean cloth or a clean
piece of clothing.

Immobilize the injured area. Don't try to realign the bone or push a bone that's sticking out back
in. If you've been trained in how to splint and professional help isn't readily available, apply a
splint to the area above and below the fracture sites. Padding the splints can help reduce
discomfort.

Apply ice packs to limit swelling and help relieve pain. Don't apply ice directly to the skin. Wrap
the ice in a towel, piece of cloth or some other material.
Treat for shock. If the person feels faint or is breathing in short, rapid breaths, lay the person
down with the head slightly lower than the trunk and, if possible, elevate the legs.




Management of Drowning

Call 999 if:

Someone is drowning

1. Get Help

Notify a lifeguard, if one is close. If not, ask someone to call 911.

If you are alone, follow the steps below.

2. Move the Person

Take the person out of the water.

3. Check for Breathing

Place your ear next to the person's mouth and nose. Do you feel air on your cheek?

Look to see if the person's chest is moving.

4. If the Person is Not Breathing, Check Pulse

Check the person's pulse for 10 seconds.

5. If There is No Pulse, Start CPR

Carefully place person on back.
For an adult or child, place the heel of one hand on the center of the chest at the nipple line. You
can also push with one hand on top of the other. For an infant, place two fingers on the
breastbone.

For an adult or child, press down at least 2 inches. Make sure not to press on ribs. For an infant,
press down about 1 and 1/2 inches. Make sure not to press on the end of the breastbone.

Do chest compressions only, at the rate of 100-120 per minute or more. Let the chest rise
completely between pushes.

Check to see if the person has started breathing.

6. Repeat if Person Is Still Not Breathing

If you've been trained in CPR, you can now open the airway by tilting the head back and lifting
the chin.

Pinch the nose of the victim closed. Take a normal breath, cover the victim's mouth with yours
to create an airtight seal, and then give 2 one-second breaths as you watch for the chest to rise.

Give 2 breaths followed by 30 chest compressions.

Continue this cycle of 30 compressions and 2 breaths until the person starts breathing or
emergency help arrives.

Management of Poisoning

Poisoning is injury or death due to swallowing, inhaling, touching or injecting various drugs,
chemicals, venoms or gases. Many substances — such as drugs and carbon monoxide — are
poisonous only in higher concentrations or dosages. And others — such as cleaners — are
dangerous only if ingested. Children are particularly sensitive to even small amounts of certain
drugs and chemicals.

How you treat someone who may have been poisoned depends on:
The person's symptoms

The person's age

Whether you know the type and amount of the substance that caused poisoning

If you are concerned about possible poisoning, call Poison Help at 800-222-1222 in the United
States or your regional poison control center. Poison control centers are excellent resources for
poisoning information and, in many situations, may advise that in-home observation is all that's
needed.

When to suspect poisoning

Poisoning signs and symptoms can mimic other conditions, such as seizure, alcohol intoxication,
stroke and insulin reaction. Signs and symptoms of poisoning may include:

Burns or redness around the mouth and lips

Breath that smells like chemicals, such as gasoline or paint thinner

Vomiting

Difficulty breathing

Drowsiness

Confusion or other altered mental status

If you suspect poisoning, be alert for clues such as empty pill bottles or packages, scattered pills,
and burns, stains and odors on the person or nearby objects. With a child, consider the possibility
that he or she may have applied medicated patches or swallowed a button battery.

When to call for help

Call 911 or your local emergency number immediately if the person is:
Drowsy or unconscious

Having difficulty breathing or has stopped breathing

Uncontrollably restless or agitated

Having seizures

Known to have taken medications, or any other substance, intentionally or accidentally
overdosed (in these situations the poisoning typically involves larger amounts, often along with
alcohol).

Call Poison Help at 800-222-1222 in the United States or your regional poison control center in
the following situations:

The person is stable and has no symptoms

The person is going to be transported to the local emergency department

Be ready to describe the person's symptoms, age, weight, other medications he or she is taking,
and any information you have about the poison. Try to determine the amount ingested and how
long since the person was exposed to it. If possible, have on hand the pill bottle, medication
package or other suspect container so you can refer to its label when speaking with the poison
control center.

What to do while waiting for help

Take the following actions until help arrives:

Swallowed poison. Remove anything remaining in the person's mouth. If the suspected poison
is a household cleaner or other chemical, read the container's label and follow instructions for
accidental poisoning.

Poison on the skin. Remove any contaminated clothing using gloves. Rinse the skin for 15 to 20
minutes in a shower or with a hose.
Poison in the eye. Gently flush the eye with cool or lukewarm water for 20 minutes or until help
arrives.

Inhaled poison. Get the person into fresh air as soon as possible.

If the person vomits, turn his or her head to the side to prevent choking.

Begin CPR if the person shows no signs of life, such as moving, breathing or coughing.

Call Poison Help at 800-222-1222 in the United States or your regional poison control for
additional instructions.

Have somebody gather pill bottles, packages or containers with labels, and any other information
about the poison to send along with the ambulance team.

Caution

Syrup of ipecac. Don't give syrup of ipecac or do anything to induce vomiting. Expert groups,
including the American Association of Poison Control Centers and the American Academy of
Pediatrics, no longer endorse using ipecac in children or adults who have taken pills or other
potentially poisonous substances. No good evidence proves its effectiveness, and it often can do
more harm than good.

If you still have old bottles of syrup of ipecac in your home, throw them away.

Button batteries. The small, flat batteries used in watches and other electronics — particularly
the larger, nickel-sized ones — are especially dangerous to small children. A battery stuck in
the esophagus can cause severe burns in as little as 2 hours.

If you suspect that a child has swallowed one of these batteries, immediately take him or her for
an emergency X-ray to determine its location. If the battery is in the esophagus, it will have to
be removed. If it has passed into the stomach, it's usually safe to allow it to pass on through the
intestinal tract.
Medicated patches. If you think a child got hold of medicated patches (adhesive products for
transdermal drug delivery), carefully inspect the child's skin and remove any that are attached.
Also check the roof of the mouth, where they can get stuck if the child sucks on them.




Management of Snake Bites

Most snakes aren't dangerous to humans. Only about 15% worldwide and 20% in the United
States are venomous. In North America, these include the rattlesnake, coral snake, water
moccasin and copperhead. Their bites can cause severe injuries and sometimes death.

Most venomous snakes have eyes like slits and are known as pit vipers. Their heads are
triangular and they have fangs. One exception is the coral snake, which has a rounded head and
round pupils. Nonvenomous snakes typically have rounded heads, round pupils and no fangs.

If a venomous snake bites you, call 911 or your local emergency number immediately, especially
if the bitten area changes color, begins to swell or is painful. Many emergency rooms stock
antivenom drugs, which may help you.

If possible, take these steps while waiting for medical help:

Move beyond the snake's striking distance.

Remain still and calm to help slow the spread of venom.

Remove jewelry and tight clothing before you start to swell.

Position yourself, if possible, so that the bite is at or below the level of your heart.

Clean the wound with soap and water. Cover it with a clean, dry dressing.

Caution

Don't use a tourniquet or apply ice.
Don't cut the wound or attempt to remove the venom.

Don't drink caffeine or alcohol, which could speed your body's absorption of venom.

Don't try to capture the snake. Try to remember its color and shape so that you can describe it,
which will help in your treatment. If you have a smartphone with you and it won't delay your
getting help, take a picture of the snake from a safe distance to help with identification.

Symptoms

Most snakebites occur on the extremities. Typical symptoms of the bite from a nonvenomous
snake are pain and scratches at the site.

Usually, after a bite from a venomous snake, there is severe burning pain at the site within 15 to
30 minutes. This can progress to swelling and bruising at the wound and all the way up the arm
or leg. Other signs and symptoms include nausea, labored breathing and a general sense of
weakness, as well as an odd taste in the mouth.

Some snakes, such as coral snakes, have toxins that cause neurological symptoms, such as skin
tingling, difficulty speaking and weakness.

Sometimes, a venomous snake can bite without injecting venom. The result of these "dry bites"
is irritation at the site.

To watch a video follow the link below

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zINn6wXwV08




Assisting an Asthma Attack Patient

Diagnosis
For adults and children over 5 years old, lung (pulmonary) function tests are used to check how
well the lungs are working. Poor lung function is a sign that your asthma isn't well controlled.
In some cases, lung function tests are also used in asthma emergencies to help your doctor
understand the severity of an asthma attack or how well treatment is working.

Lung function tests include:

Peak flow. Your doctor may take a peak flow reading when you come in for a scheduled visit
or for emergency treatment during an asthma attack. This test measures how quickly you can
breathe out. You may also use a peak flow meter at home to monitor your lung function.

The results of this test are known as peak expiratory flow (PEF). A peak flow test is done by
blowing into a mouthpiece as hard and as fast as you can with a single breath (expiration).

Spirometry. During spirometry, you take deep breaths and forcefully exhale into a hose
connected to a machine called a spirometer. A common spirometry measurement is forced
expiratory volume, which measures how much air you can breathe out in one second.

The results of this test are known as forced expiratory volume (FEV). Spirometry can also
measure how much air your lungs can hold and the rate at which you can inhale and exhale.

Nitric oxide measurement. This exam measures the amount of nitric oxide gas you have in your
breath when you exhale. High nitric oxide readings indicate inflammation of the bronchial tubes.

Pulse oximetry. This test measures the amount of oxygen in your blood. It's measured through
your fingernail and only takes seconds.




Management of Asthma Attack

If you and your doctor have worked out an asthma plan, follow its directions at the first sign of
an asthma attack.
This generally means taking two to six puffs of a quick-acting (rescue) inhaler to get airway-
expanding medication, such as albuterol (ProAir HFA, Proventil HFA, Ventolin HFA, others)
and levalbuterol (Xopenex), deep into your lungs. Small children and those who have trouble
with inhalers can use a nebulizer. After 20 minutes, you can repeat the treatment one time if
necessary. If you continue to wheeze or feel breathless after treatment, visit your doctor or urgent
care that day.

If you're having symptoms of a severe asthma attack, such as difficulty speaking because you're
so short of breath, use your quick-acting (rescue) medication and get to a doctor's office or
urgent care immediately.

Your doctor may recommend that you continue to use quick-acting medication every three to
four hours for a day or two after the attack. You might also need to take oral corticosteroid
medication for a short time.

Emergency Management of Asthma Attack

If you go to the emergency room for an asthma attack in progress, you'll need medications to
get your asthma under immediate control. These can include:

Short-acting beta agonists, such as albuterol. These are the same medications as those in your
quick-acting (rescue) inhaler. You may need to use a machine called a nebulizer, which turns
the medication into a mist that can be inhaled deep into your lungs.

Oral corticosteroids. Taken in pill form, these medications help reduce lung inflammation and
get your asthma symptoms under control. Corticosteroids can also be given intravenously,
typically to patients who are vomiting or who are experiencing respiratory failure.

Ipratropium (Atrovent HFA). Ipratropium is sometimes used as a bronchodilator to treat a severe
asthma attack, especially if albuterol is not fully effective.

Intubation, mechanical ventilation and oxygen. If your asthma attack is life-threatening, your
doctor may put a breathing tube down your throat into your upper airway. Using a machine that
pumps oxygen into your lungs will help you breathe while your doctor gives you medications
to bring your asthma under control.

After your asthma symptoms improve, your doctor may want you to stay in the emergency room
for a few hours or longer to make sure you don't have another asthma attack. When your doctor
feels your asthma is sufficiently under control, you'll be able to go home. Your doctor will give
you instructions on what to do if you have another attack.

If your asthma symptoms don't improve after emergency treatment, your doctor may admit you
to the hospital and give you medications every hour or every few hours. If you're having severe
asthma symptoms, you may need to breathe oxygen through a mask. In some cases, a severe,
persistent asthma attack requires a stay in the intensive care unit (ICU).

Assisting an Epileptic Patient




Epilepsy is a common condition of the brain in which a person tends to have recurrent
unprovoked seizures.

About 70% of people with epilepsy gain control of their seizures with medication. People who
continue to have seizures are more vulnerable to the potential risks associated with seizures,
especially when seizures occur without warning and impair awareness.

Epilepsy, like other long-term conditions such as asthma or diabetes, comes with certain risks.
If left unchecked these can become very serious.

Seizure-related risks are higher when people have poorly controlled seizures. Good seizure
control is the first step in reducing seizure-related risks.

Seizures can sometimes lead to injuries or falls, and they can occasionally be more serious –
even contributing to, or causing, death. Different types of seizures carry different risks.
Your risk level depends on the type of seizures you have, and your lifestyle. For instance, poorly
controlled tonic-clonic seizures pose the highest safety risk, and if you take part in activities
such as mountain climbing, this risk is increased.

Life is never risk-free, but taking positive action to reduce your seizures, thinking about risks
specific to you and discussing seizure management with your doctor are a start to reducing some
of your seizure-related risks.

Epileptic seizure first aid

If you are with someone having a tonic-clonic seizure (where the body stiffens, followed by
general muscle jerking), try to:

Stay calm and remain with the person.

If they have food or fluid in their mouth, roll them onto their side immediately.

Keep them safe and protect them from injury.

Place something soft under their head and loosen any tight clothing.

Reassure the person until they recover.

Time the seizure, if you can.

Gently roll the person onto their side after the jerking stops.

Do not put anything into their mouth or restrain or move the person, unless they are in danger.

If a person having a seizure is in a wheelchair

If a person has a seizure when they are in a wheelchair, car seat or stroller:

Leave the person seated with the seatbelt on (unless it is causing injury).

Put the wheelchair brakes on.
If it’s a tilt wheelchair, tilt the seat and lock in position.

Support their head until the seizure has ended.

Lean the person slightly to one side to aid drainage of any fluid in the mouth.

After the seizure, if the person is having trouble breathing or they need to sleep, take them out
of the chair and put them in the recovery position.

If their breathing difficulties continue, call an ambulance and closely monitor the person. Be
prepared to perform CPR if they stop breathing.

Be aware that the CPR technique for adults is different to the CPR technique for young
children and infants.

Seizures in water

If a seizure occurs in water:

Support the person's head so their face is out of the water.

Tilt their head back to ensure a clear airway.

If the person is in a pool, remove them from the water when the jerking stops. Note: In the rare
circumstance the jerking does not stop, seek help from others if possible, and remove the person
from the water at the shallowest end of the pool.

If the person is in the surf, remove them from the water immediately.

Flotation devices may be useful when removing someone from water.

Seek help if possible.

Once out of the water:
Call triple zero (000) for an ambulance immediately. (Do this even if the person is breathing, as
they may have inhaled water)

Place the person on their side.

Check to see if they are breathing.

If they are not breathing, or they are not breathing normally, reposition the person onto their
back and begin the appropriate form of CPR: CPR for adults is different to the CPR for young
children and infants.

When to call an ambulance for an epileptic seizure

Call for an ambulance if:

the seizure lasts for 5 or more minutes or longer than what is normal for the person

a second seizure quickly follows

the person is not responding for more than 5 minutes after the seizure ends

the person has breathing difficulties after the jerking stops

it is the person’s first known seizure

the seizure occurs in water

the person is injured

you are in doubt.

Assisting a Diabetic Patient

Diabetes can become serious in the short term if blood sugar levels become either too high or
too low. The following information details what to do in an emergency.
This covers low blood sugar (hypoglycemia), very high blood sugar (diabetic ketoacidosis) and
what to do if you are left without your diabetes medication and/or supplies.

What counts as a diabetic emergency?

It can be a difficult area sometimes to know what counts as a genuine emergency.

News reports in recent years have highlighted that a significant number of ‘999’ ambulance call-
outs have not been necessary – for example to treat mild hypoglycemia which, in some cases,
has been successfully treated before the ambulance has arrived.




This isn’t to say that conditions, such as hypoglycemia, are not dangerous but that it’s important
to know when a situation really is an emergency so that an ambulance is not unnecessarily called.

When should I call an ambulance?

An ambulance will be needed if someone has either very high or very low blood sugar levels
that presents an immediate danger and neither they nor anyone around is confidently able to
treat them.

Ketoacidosis and Hyperosmolar Hyperglycemic Nonketotic Syndrome are both life threatening
conditions. Hypoglycemia can also be life threatening in some cases.

Someone with diabetes that is unconscious is one of the situations in which you should call for
an ambulance.

Severe hypoglycemia

Hypoglycemia can become dangerous if it is not treated quickly, particularly if it is a result of
an insulin overdose.

Severe hypoglycemia is generally recognised as hypoglycemia involving:
Convulsions (fitting)

Unconsciousness

Hypoglycemia can often be treated at home but if someone is unable to take sugar or does not
show signs of improvement after taking sugar, other options will be needed such as a glucagon
injection or an ambulance.

If you have glucagon, check it is in date, and follow the instructions in the glucagon kit carefully.
If you are unsure about using the kit, and nobody is present who is, call for an ambulance.

Treating non-severe hypoglycaemia

To prevent hypoglycemia developing into a more serious situation, make sure you have hypo
treatments, such as the HypoWallet, to hand.

Preventing emergencies

In most cases, non-severe hypoglycemia can be treated by taking glucose followed by slower
acting carbohydrate such as bread or fruit.

To prevent hypoglycemia developing into a more serious situation, make sure you have hypo
treatments available at all times. Having a HypoWallet is a useful way to ensure you’re well
prepared for hypos.

Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA)

Diabetic ketoacidosis is a serious condition which develops if blood glucose levels become very
high.

The symptoms include vomiting and a laboured form of breathing known as kussmaul breathing,
which may be identified by gasping breaths. If someone is going through DKA, it is often
possible to detect ketones on the breath, which can be similar to a fruity smell or similar to nail
polish.
If diabetic ketoacidosis is suspected and the person is either incoherent or unable to help him or
herself, call 999.

Hyperosmolar Hyperglycemic Nonketotic Syndrome (HHNS)

HHNS is a short term complication that can occur in people with non-insulin dependent diabetes,
such as type 2 diabetes, if blood glucose levels rise to a very high level of 30 mmol/l or above.

If someone is showing the signs of HHNS it is important they receive emergency treatment.

Whilst the ambulance is coming

If the person is unconscious or unable to sit or stand, put them into the recovery position. Try to
stay with the person in case their situation should get worse.

Diabetes emergency ID

If an emergency situation is developing, it’s important the people around you know that you
have diabetes to help them to be able to help you.

Wearing emergency identification will help people, including paramedics, to recognise that you
have diabetes should you need emergency care.

Alert ID diabetes emergency identification

Running out of diabetes medication or supplies

You should ensure you have sufficient supplies, including spares, wherever possible but there
can be times when you may need emergency medication or supplies.If you need medication and
supplies right away you will need to get an emergency prescription.




Effective communication on casualty’s condition
Thinking about how best to communicate with casualties requires an understanding of how
people behave in emergencies, what they need to hear, and how they want to hear it. Answers
to these questions can come from those who have experienced being casualties, but this comes
with significant challenges. A useful alternative is to collect feedback from people who have
played casualties in live exercises.

Two key positive factors in Casualty Communication

Reassurance – the ability to reassure and calm the individual down

Authoritative directness – the ability to give simple, clear and directive instructions




To assist frontline responders in remembering key methods to communicate we recommend
bearing in mind the following ‘FEAR’ mnemonic:




F – communicate clear facts about what has happened, when responders can get to casualties,
what is going on, etc. And if you aren’t clear make it clear you aren’t clear!




E – establish a line of communication as early as humanly possible.




A – where possible keep casualties active in their own recovery and mobilisation. Research
indicates a major factor in saving lives is the active participation of others in the incident in
providing assistance.
R – updates and communication must be regular. Even if there is nothing to update on, just
ensuring that casualties are told ‘nothing has changed but we are still doing X Y and Z’ creates
an ongoing and important dialogue. Don’t leave casualties for unspecified amounts of time and
always indicate roughly when you will update them.




Handing over casualty to medical personnel

Once you have connected with the emergency service’s operator and requested an ambulance,
hold the line to tell them details such as:




Location of casualty—providing the exact address is best, but if you aren’t sure of this, give
some landmarks or nearest cross streets, and some directions

Number of casualties

Nature and extent of illness or accident—include the physical condition of the casualty, and any
relevant signs and symptoms (see below for more details)

The number of the phone you are using

Your name.

Then hold the line to answer any further questions and provide any other relevant details, such
as damaged power lines.




The casualty’s condition

When providing details of the casualty’s condition, include the following

Colour—What colour is the casualty’s skin?
Conscious state—Is the casualty conscious?

Breathing—Is the casualty breathing? If not, have rescue breaths and CPR commenced?

Bleeding—Is the bleeding controlled? Is it bright red spurting blood or dark red flowing blood?

Pupils—Are the pupils of equal size and reacting to light?

Shock—Are there signs of shock (pale, sweaty, nauseous, cold)?

Movement—Does the casualty have coordinated movement?

Can the casualty feel and move limbs, if conscious?

Anything abnormal (such as bruising, a bone sticking out or swelling).




Handing over to Emergency Services personnel

On the arrival of the ambulance:




Continue first aid management and observation of the casualty until the ambulance officer is
ready to assume care

provide as much information as possible, this may include:

the nature of the accident to the time you arrived on the scene

the types of first aid management provided

the duration of any Basic Life Support

Provide any other information that is asked for, including your contact details
Stay and assist the ambulance officer if requested to do so.




Monitoring Casualty’s condition

It is important that the whole process of responding to the casualty occurs quickly so that
assessment and management of the situation may be carried out effectively.




How do you know that somebody is in need of first aid in the first place? What are the signs that
make you suddenly stop what you are doing and become more alert to an incident or situation?
Your answer may include using your senses:




What do you hear? Perhaps you heard shouting, screaming, a call for help, a crash, or moaning.




What do you see? Did you see a person on the ground, strange behaviour, an upturned chair, a
group of people, smoke or flames?




What do you smell? Did you smell gas, petrol, fumes or burning?




The following are some guidelines for responding to the casualty’s condition:

Do not approach the casualty if it is unsafe to do so.

ALWAYS call for help.
If the casualty is unconscious, determine airway and breathing

If the person is conscious but can’t move or feel their arms or legs, DON’T move them. They
may have a spinal injury.

Manage illness and injuries with the guidance of a qualified first aider and stay with the casualty.

If you need to phone for an ambulance and give details of the situation and workplace location,
make sure you know exactly where you are! You should know the following:

Address

Nearest cross street

The building level you are on

The best way for the ambulance to gain access to the casualty

Effective first aid principles

What actually is first aid? First aid is the initial care of the sick or injured. First aid management
is a set of established procedures and aims to:

Help promote recovery

Prevent the injury or sickness from becoming worse

Seek medical help

Promote a safe environment

Provide comfort

Protect the unconscious casualty

Preserve life.
It is important to follow these basic first aid steps:

Do not panic

Assess the situation quickly

Make sure the area is safe to approach

Identify the injury or sickness

Call for help

Stay with the casualty

Manage the casualty

Monitor the casualty; their situation could change at any time
Learning Activities

4.2.1.4.1 Practical Activities

You are in the skills laboratory and your instructor provides you with a mannequin. Demonstrate
how to provide first aid to an epileptic patient using the mannequin?

4.2.1.4.2 Self-Assessment
 You are provided with the following questions for self -assessment, attempt them and check your
 responses

You have encountered an unconscious patient who needs cardio-pulmonary resuscitation. What
are the steps of cardio-pulmonary resuscitation?

You are the only medic around in your village. Your neighbor calls you to help an adult who
has experienced severe choking. What is the procedure of performing back blows and abdominal
thrusts?

What is the management of burns and scalds?

You are the first to reach to the scene of a patient involved in trauma. Primary survey in the
management of trauma involves?




One of your classmates begins nose bleeding. Demonstrate how you will help him to stop the
nose bleeding?

Cuts and scrapes are very common in day to day life. How can you help a patient with a minor
cut or scrapes?

One of your friends drowns in a swimming escapade. As a health worker, how can you help a
drowning patient?
You are in the emergency room where you have a patient with asthma attack. What is the
emergency management of asthma attack?




4.2.1.5 Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials
      Casualty department                               Bandages
      Functional skills laboratory                      Gauze Pads
      First aid kit                                     Medical Tape
      Emergency room                                    Elastic Bandages
      Emergency room standard                           Pain relievers
       manuals                                           Instant cold pack
      Emergency trolley                                 Waste disposal bins
      First Aid Manual.                                 Personal protective equipment
      Tweezers                                          Health workers
      Alcohol Swabs                                     Presentation charts
      Antibiotic Ointment                               Flip charts




References

Jevon, P. & Ewens, B. (2012) Monitoring the Critically Ill Patient, 3rd Edition, Wiley-
Blackwell, Oxford

Peitzman A.B., et al. (2012) The Trauma Manual, 2nd edition. Philadelphia, Pa., Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.

Rapid Response to Everyday Emergencies (2016) A Nurse's Guide. Philadelphia, Pa., Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.

Royal College of Nursing (2017) Record Keeping: The Facts, RCN, viewed 28 May 2018,
https://www.rcn.org.uk/professional-development/publications/pub-006051
2.2.1.7 MODEL ANSWERS

Self-Assessment

You have encountered an unconscious patient who needs cardio-pulmonary resuscitation. What
are the steps of cardio-pulmonary resuscitation?

Step 1 Call 999 or the nearest ambulance services

Step 2 Place the person on their back and open their airway




Step 3 Check for breathing-Place your ear next the person’s mouth and listen for no more than
10 seconds. If you do not hear breathing, or you only hear occasional gasps, begin CPR.

Step 4 Perform 30 chest compressions-Place one of your hands on top of the other and clasp
them together. With the heel of the hands and straight elbows, push hard and fast in the center
of the chest, slightly below the nipples.

Push at least 2 inches deep. Compress their chest at a rate of least 100 times per minute. Let the
chest rise fully between compressions.

Step 5 Perform two rescue breaths-Making sure their mouth is clear, tilt their head back slightly
and lift their chin. Pinch their nose shut, place your mouth fully over theirs, and blow to make
their chest rise.

Step 6 Repeat-Repeat the cycle of 30 chest compressions and two rescue breaths until the person
starts breathing or help arrives.

You are the only medic around in your village. Your neighbor calls you to help an adult who
has experienced severe choking. What is the procedure of performing back blows and abdominal
thrusts?

Back blows Procedure
Stand behind them and slightly to one side. Support their chest with 1 hand. Lean them forward
so the object blocking their airway will come out of their mouth, rather than moving further
down.

Give up to 5 sharp blows between their shoulder blades with the heel of your hand. The heel is
between the palm of your hand and your wrist.

Check if the blockage has cleared.

If not, give up to 5 abdominal thrusts.

Abdominal Thrust Procedure

Stand behind the person who's choking.

Place your arms around their waist and bend them forward.

Clench 1 fist and place it right above their belly button.

Put the other hand on top of your fist and pull sharply inwards and upwards.

Repeat this movement up to 5 times.

What is the management of burns and scalds?

immediately get the person away from the heat source to stop the burning

cool the burn with cool or lukewarm running water for 20 minutes – don't use ice, iced water, or
any creams or greasy substances such as butter

remove any clothing or jewellery that's near the burnt area of skin, including babies' nappies -
but don't move anything that's stuck to the skin

make sure the person keeps warm – by using a blanket, for example, but take care not to rub it
against the burnt area
cover the burn by placing a layer of cling film over it – a clean plastic bag could also be used
for burns on your hand

use painkillers such as paracetamol or ibuprofen to treat any pain

if the face or eyes are burnt, sit up as much as possible, rather than lying down - this helps to
reduce swelling

You are the first to reach to the scene of a patient involved in trauma. Primary survey in the
management of trauma involves?




Airway-- open the patient's airway using a jaw-thrust maneuver with manual, in-line
stabilization of the neck. If you find food, blood, vomitus, or other debris, suction the airway
quickly to prevent aspiration. To better remove secretions, you may need to carefully logroll the
patient to his side. Manually stabilize his neck and spine as you do so.

Breathing-- Note respiratory rate and depth, chest expansion, and accessory muscle use and
auscultate breath sounds bilaterally. Also palpate for crepitus or subcutaneous air in the neck
and chest, which can indicate a pneumothorax or airway injury.

Circulation--Once you've assessed and supported your patient's breathing, attend to his
circulatory status. Assess for the presence and quality of peripheral pulses to quickly estimate
blood prssure

Disability--To evaluate disability, you'll evaluate the patient's LOC, pupil response, and gross
sensorimotor function. To document his baseline LOC, quickly assess and record an initial GCS
score.

Exposure--The final component of the primary survey is exposure. Remove the patient's clothing
completely so you can inspect his entire body for injuries. Use good judgment when removing
clothing; trying to remove a shirt by pulling or manipulating it may worsen the injury or pain.
Cutting clothing away with trauma shears is usually best.
One of your classmates begins nose bleeding. Demonstrate how you will help him to stop the
nose bleeding?

sit down and firmly pinch the soft part of your nose, just above your nostrils, for at least 10-15
minutes

lean forward and breathe through your mouth – this will drain blood into your nose instead of
down the back of your throat

place an ice pack or bag of frozen vegetables covered by a towel on the bridge of your nose

stay upright, rather than lying down, as this reduces the blood pressure in the blood vessels of
your nose and will discourage further bleeding

If the bleeding eventually stops, you won't usually need to seek medical advice. However, in
some cases you may need further treatment from your doctor or in hospital

Cuts and scrapes are very common in day to day life. How can you help a patient with a minor
cut or scrapes?

Wash your hands. This helps avoid infection.

Stop the bleeding. Minor cuts and scrapes usually stop bleeding on their own. If needed, apply
gentle pressure with a clean bandage or cloth and elevate the wound until bleeding stops.

Clean the wound. Rinse the wound with water. Keeping the wound under running tap water will
reduce the risk of infection. Wash around the wound with soap. But don't get soap in the wound.
And don't use hydrogen peroxide or iodine, which can be irritating. Remove any dirt or debris
with a tweezers cleaned with alcohol. See a doctor if you can't remove all debris.

Apply an antibiotic or petroleum jelly. Apply a thin layer of an antibiotic ointment or petroleum
jelly to keep the surface moist and help prevent scarring. Certain ingredients in some ointments
can cause a mild rash in some people. If a rash appears, stop using the ointment.
Cover the wound. Apply a bandage, rolled gauze or gauze held in place with paper tape.
Covering the wound keeps it clean. If the injury is just a minor scrape or scratch, leave it
uncovered.

Change the dressing. Do this at least once a day or whenever the bandage becomes wet or dirty.

Get a tetanus shot. Get a tetanus shot if you haven't had one in the past five years and the wound
is deep or dirty.

Watch for signs of infection. See a doctor if you see signs of infection on the skin or near the
wound, such as redness, increasing pain, drainage, warmth or swelling.

One of your friends drowns in a swimming escapade. As a health worker, how can you help a
drowning patient?

Get Help--Notify a lifeguard, if one is close. If not, ask someone to call 999.

Move the Person--Take the person out of the water.

Check for Breathing--Place your ear next to the person's mouth and nose. Do you feel air on
your cheek?

If the Person is Not Breathing, Check Pulse--Check the person's pulse for 10 seconds.

If There is No Pulse, Start cardio-pulmonary resuscitation

Repeat cardio-pulmonary resuscitation if Person Is Still Not Breathing

You are in the emergency room where you have a patient with asthma attack. What is the
emergency management of asthma attack?

Short-acting beta agonists, such as albuterol--These are the same medications as those in your
quick-acting (rescue) inhaler. You may need to use a machine called a nebulizer, which turns
the medication into a mist that can be inhaled deep into your lungs.
Oral corticosteroids. Taken in pill form, these medications help reduce lung inflammation and
get your asthma symptoms under contr ol. Corticosteroids can also be given intravenously,
typically to patients who are vomiting or who are experiencing respiratory failure.

Ipratropium (Atrovent HFA). Ipratropium is sometimes used as a bronchodilator to treat a severe
asthma attack, especially if albuterol is not fully effective.

Intubation, mechanical ventilation and oxygen. If your asthma attack is life-threatening, your
doctor may put a breathing tube down your throat into your upper airway. Using a machine that
pumps oxygen into your lungs will help you breathe while your doctor gives you medications
to bring your asthma under control.
Learning Outcome 3 Evaluate first aid intervention

  Introduction to the learning outcome

  This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to evaluate first aid
  intervention. It includes evaluating response of the casualty to the intervention and evaluating
  first aider’s response to the situation. Effective evaluation of the casualty helps in proper
  response of the emergency situation.

  Performance Standard
    i.   Evaluated the response of the casualty to the intervention based on the initial
         assessment
   ii.   Evaluated the response of the first aider to the situation based on principles and
         procedures of first aid

  Information Sheet

  Definition of Terms

  Casualty- the department of a hospital providing immediate treatment for emergency cases

  First Aid- is the first and immediate assistance given to any person suffering from either a minor
  or serious illness or injury, with care provided to preserve life, prevent the condition from
  worsening, or to promote recovery

  Emergency services- are the public organizations whose job is to take quick action to deal with
  emergencies when they occur, especially the fire brigade, the police, and the ambulance service.

  Injury- also known as physical trauma is damage to the body caused by external force. This may
  be caused by accidents, falls, hits, weapons, and other causes.

  Evaluating response of the casualty to the intervention
Figure 10: Apply First Aid, Assess Casualty

https://sielearning.tafensw.edu.au/MCS/FirstAid_Ultimo/firstaid/lo/5251/graphics/2006_157_f
01.gif




An emergency plan is a set of arrangements for responding to, and recovering from emergencies,
and it is about protecting life, property and the environment. The development of an emergency
plan should take into account existing plans at other administrative levels, plans that operate at
the same level, as well as any plans developed for specific hazards.

The prerequisites for planning are: a recognition that risks and vulnerability exist, and that
emergencies can occur; an awareness by the community, government, and decision-makers of
the need to plan and of the benefits of planning; implementation of the plan is guaranteed by
appropriate legislation; and, designation of an organization responsible for coordinating both
planning and emergency response and recovery in the event of an emergency.

The planning process can be applied to any community, organization or activity.
It includes:

Project definition: determines the aim, objectives and scope of an emergency plan, and decides
the tasks and the resources required to performing these tasks.

Formation of a representative planning group: to gather the required information and to gain the
commitment of key people and organizations, both of which will contribute to the successful
implementation of the plan.

Potential problem analysis: through breaking the problem into its components to examine risks,
their causes, possible preventive strategies, response and recovery strategies, and trigger events
for these strategies.

Resource analysis: to identify the required resources for the response and recovery strategies,
resources available, discrepancy between requirement and availability, and responsibility.

Designation of roles and responsibilities to individuals and organizations.

Management structure concerning the command of individual organizations and control across
organizations.

Developing strategies and systems for specific response and recovery.

Documentation: The written emergency plan will consist of the outputs of each step of the
process.

A four-pillar strategy

The WHO’s Health Action in Crises (HAC) has recently elaborated a five-year strategy to build
the capacity of the health sector and communities in emergency preparedness and risk reduction.
This Strategy consists of four pillars:

Assessing and monitoring baseline information on the status of health emergency preparedness
and risk management at regional and country levels
Institutionalizing emergency preparedness and risk management in ministries of health and
establishing an effective all-hazard/ whole-health programme for this purpose

Encouraging and supporting community-based emergency preparedness and risk management

Improving knowledge and skills in health emergency preparedness and response, and risk
management.

This strategy aims to substantially increase the preparedness of the communities and the health
sectorto manage health consequences of mass casualty incidents and other emergencies and
crises, and provides the conceptual underpinning to these Guidelines.




Guiding Principle

A number of guiding principles should be observed within all plans, protocols and operational
procedures. These principles are designed to assist planners, policymakers, and implementing
agencies as they develop plans for their own specific situations.

Clear lines of responsibility

Plans must clearly define the roles, responsibilities and expected activities of all those dealing
with the incident. They must allow response to be scaled up from local, to provincial/state and
to national levels in a seamless manner, with no confusion as to who is in charge at each phase
of the response.

All-hazard applicability

While risk assessment will identify those hazards most likely to result in a mass casualty incident
in a given community, that community must prepare its response in such a way that the
arrangements will be effective no matter what the event, be it a hurricane, an airplane crash, or
a pandemic.

Scalability
Preparedness must address different scales of incident and surge in demand for health care.
While some activities (triage, transportation, treatment) are common to managing all mass
casualty incidents, additional measures such as evacuation of large populations may be
necessary. For example, the scale of the 2004 Asian tsunami was beyond the thinking of
planners. Plans must allow for “scale-up” in such events.

Whole-of-health

In addition to death and injury, other health considerations must be planned for. Planning
strategies must also take into account the basics of environmental health (i.e., water, sanitation,
housing); chronic diseases (including mental health); maternal and child health; communicable
diseases; nutrition; and health care delivery services (including health infrastructure).

Knowledge-based

Almost every imaginable form of mass casualty incident has already occurred before, and
planners therefore have access to a great – and growing – body of knowledge. Useful sources of
information may include: official reports from other countries (particularly those with similar
conditions); scientific and epidemiological data; and documentation from WHO and other
organizations

Multisectoral

The success or failure of responses to mass casualty incidents depends on the cooperation of
many sectors – communications, transportation, law and order, security, water and sanitation,
social services, and other non-health sectors – that may not coordinate their “normal” daily
activities. Coordination should be institutionalized not only at the level of national ministries,
but – ultimately most important – at the local level of communities.

National policies which enable local solutions

The fundamental concerns of a mass casualty management system are public safety and the
building of safer communities (“building” in this case means not only physical construction but
strengthening all of the elements – human, organizational and infrastructural – that make up a
community). While plans must be in place to mobilize provincial/state and national resources if
required, the national policy and strategy emphasis must be clearly directed at enabling local
authorities to prepare for, respond to and recover from a mass casualty incident.




No matter what forms that government and public administration take, national emergency
management systems should include:

Identification of lines of authority, from the national to the local level

Financial arrangements for funding emergency work

Arrangements to ensure that government and community activities are maintained (for example,
creation of parallel or “hardened” communications systems to take over if normal voice or data
transfer systems are affected)

National stockpiling of appropriate resources (including provincial or state and local
prepositioning of stockpiles)

Database of national experts for advice on specific problems

Protocols and formal arrangements for coordinated efforts with other countries, or between
provincial/state governments within the country.




The Ministry of Health: a leading partner

Whatever the formal institutional arrangements, the Ministry of Health must be heavily involved
in all national emergency management potentially dealing with mass casualties, because of both
its expertise and its normative role in the setting of health-related standards and rules and
procedures. For instance even if the Ministry of Health does not operate ambulances – in some
countries this may be the task of the Red Cross/Red Crescent, Civil Defense authorities, or even
the private sector – the Ministry of Health is nevertheless likely to set the standards regarding
how ambulances are to be equipped, the training of crews, the numbers of ambulances per
thousand population, etc. Because of its expertise, the Ministry of Health is usually well placed
to help health care facilities and main health disciplines to develop their emergency plans, create
training programme, prepare drills and programme, prepare drills and, prepare drills and
exercises, and so on. Finally, the Ministry is usually responsible for promoting standards and
overseeing accreditation, for example in validating the plans developed by health care facilities
and their local partners.

A dedicated unit within the Ministry of Health

In order for the Ministry of Health to meet its potential as a partner, it must organize itself in a
way which maximizes its comparative advantages and brings together the people best suited to
the task at hand. A necessary first step will be to form permanent structures with institutional
responsibility for all Ministry of Health activities related to planning for mass casualty events.
A recommended configuration is a dedicated emergency committee of senior staff, chaired by
the Minister of Health, and a dedicated emergency preparedness and response unit whose head
serves as secretary of the Committee. The Committee and the Unit should adopt a
multidisciplinary, all-hazard, whole-of-health approach, and therefore will consist of experts in
all relevant fields.

Formal and informal relationships with other partners

In most countries, when a mass casualty incident occurs that requires a national response, some
form of national emergency plan exists which is invoked according to established procedures.
Within such arrangements, the immediate role of the Ministry of Health will be to act as a focal
point for liaison, coordination and communication between the various health system
components (e.g., public, private, military, and NGOs) as well as with other ministries, the office
of the head of state and, when necessary, international agencies. This should be done based on
a health sector plan (see following chapter) that takes into consideration the need for
interdisciplinary coordination with health partners. Because of the potential for confusion
arising over issues such as legal authority, jurisdiction, customs’ importation procedures, and so
on, the Ministry should sign Memoranda of Understanding (or equivalent agreements) with
other partners to formalize the necessary arrangements. These agreements should be written
with relevant national legislations in mind (see: A solid legislative basis, below).

Equally important, Ministry of Health staff should establish working relationships with staff in
other organizations so that, during a crisis, the “players” (key individuals) are known to each
other. This can be most effectively done by joint planning and exercises at all levels (discussed
below), as well as regular meetings and periodic evaluations or reviews.

International cooperation

Although another part of government such as the Ministry of Foreign Affairs may have formal
responsibility for requesting or accepting assistance from outside the country, the Ministry of
Health will have an essential role of facilitating, and coordinating international health assistance
if it is required. This applies when assistance is offered or received, and will normally be
coordinated with other ministries, the national Emergency Management Agency, and the office
of the head of state. Once again, Memoranda of Understanding or other agreements for mutual
aid, support and cooperation should be signed, particularly with neighboring countries,
international agencies (including WHO) and international NGOs. It cannot be over-emphasized
how important it is for these arrangements to have been prepared at a detailed level, in order for
responses to work efficiently.

A solid legislative basis

The Ministry of Health should ensure (in concert with other ministries) that legislations exist
which provides adequate authority for mass casualty management within the overall emergency
preparedness and response plan. This goes well beyond providing special emergency powers
when circumstances require, although that is of course an essential component. Responses from
all levels of government (local, provincial/state, and national) must be defined and enabled in
the appropriate laws, which will typically have titles like Emergency Management Act, Health
Act, Community Services Act, and Quarantine Act.

At a minimum, legislations should define the roles of Ministers and other senior officials (e.g.,
Chief Health Officer, Health/Medical Emergency Coordinator) and provide legal authority for
national emergency councils, committees and advisory groups. It must enable the essential
Command, Control and Coordination models which form the basis for all emergency
management systems. If existing legislations or legislative gaps (i.e., lack of legally defined
authority) act as barriers to effective mass casualty management, the Ministry of Health should
help to draft the necessary amendments, according to the established law-making arrangements
in the country.




Establishing the Baseline

Improving existing systems first requires establishing a “baseline” – an assessment of current
system’s capacity, against which planned changes can eventually be measured. To do so, the
Ministry of Health should perform a comprehensive analysis of relevant health care resources
available in the country, or direct lower levels of government, such as provinces/states, to do so
if that is where operational responsibility for health is located. This analysis may entail a
comprehensive review of the health care system, or be a more tightly focused look at those
components that will be particularly called on in the event of a mass casualty incident. Whatever
the focus, the baseline analysis should assess and map both the quantity and quality of available
health care facilities, personnel and equipment.

Based on this analysis, a detailed risk assessment (see below), and consultation about the
standards that risk assessment (see below), and consultation about the standards that must be
met in emergency responses, a “gap analysis” can be carried out to (a) decide how to improve,
a “gap analysis” can be carried out to (a) decide how to improve these resources to the required
standards and (b) calculate the additional resources required to respond to a mass casualty
incident should one occur. It will provide the Ministry of Health with the information it needs
to set priorities and coordinate the redistribution of resources for optimum preparedness.

A variety of tools are available to assist with this process, and for assessing specific areas of
health care.
For example, an analysis of the gap between existing trauma care resources and the desired
standard can be performed using the WHO Guidelines for Essential Trauma Care and Pre-
hospital Trauma Care

Systems (see Sources of Information). These publications set affordable minimum standards for
trauma care capabilities, including human resources, physical resources and administrative
mechanisms.

Hazard analysis and risk assessment




Table 4: Hazard Analysis and Risk Assessment Template




https://i.pinimg.com/originals/fd/6a/78/fd6a78e9fb92272065658899aad006c6.jpg




A second key initiative should be to provide a detailed understanding of the hazards and risks
specific to the country. The WHO’s Community emergency preparedness: a manual for
managers and policy-makers provides a detailed discussion of this process. While it may be
carried out or directed by the Ministry of Health at national level, hazard analysis and risk
assessment should also be carried out on a provincial/state basis, particularly if health expertise
and resources are concentrated at those levels. Emphasis should be placed on gathering
retrospective data on previous incidents.

This should not be limited to large-scale disasters but to those of smaller scale such as major
traffic or industrial accidents, mudslides or floods that did not require national intervention, fires
and building collapses, and so on. It should also include a forward-looking component assessing
risk in the future from elements such as unsafe urban development, or changes in weather
patterns.

Coupled with the baseline assessment, the information provided by this hazard analysis and risk
assessment will provide a solid basis for the subsequent process of planning, and for the
allocation of resources. Having in hand the information collected in the baseline analysis, and
in the hazard analysis and risk assessment, the Ministry of Health will be ready to help improve
national preparedness for mass casualty incidents by implementing or sponsoring (i.e., helping
other partners to implement) a number of initiatives. Some of these will be internal to the
Ministry, while others will be carried out in cooperation with partner Ministries or agencies.

Monitoring, Surveillance and Early Warning

Ongoing collection and analysis of information is a vital part of preparedness. At the planning
stage, the Ministry of Health should assess what types of information will be needed to support
the smooth functioning of the National Mass Casualty Management Plan. Particular attention
should be paid to the functions of monitoring, surveillance and early warning.

Monitoring system capacity

Unless some other part of government already has this responsibility, a unit within the Ministry
(likely the one which carried out the baseline analysis) should be designated with responsibility
to gather and maintain such information on an ongoing basis. This must include the most recent
data on system capacity and resources, as well as documentation of lessons observed from
previous incidents. As well as collecting such information, the unit should take responsibility
for processing and disseminating such information in ways that are useful to policy makers and
decision makers – both as part of preparation and in the event of a mass casualty incident.

The unit should make efforts to use information technology to best advantage. For example,
Geospatial Information Systems (GIS) are increasingly affordable, and can be flexible and cost-
effective means of both collecting and providing data vital to tasks such as establishment of
temporary camps, quantifying deaths, and managing logistics. Similarly, web-based solutions
(i.e., use of the internet) may be useful for involving and keeping stakeholders informed through
dedicated websites, online courses and electronic discussion groups.

Surveillance, epidemiology and data collection

As noted earlier, mass casualty incident management does not solely involve trauma cases,
although injuries do constitute an important part of the caseload in many incidents. With the
increasing risk of pandemics and biological and chemical incidents, the Ministry of Health
should ensure that a surveillance system is in place, which will undertake tasks such as pattern
recognition in order to identify risks early and initiate protective measures as needed.

However, it is important that surveillance systems routinely collect data on injuries since, as
mentioned previously, most morbidity and mortality in mass casualty incidents may in fact come
from the cumulative effects of smaller-scale events.

The operational requirements for the surveillance system should be informed by the hazard
analysis and risk assessment exercise carried out earlier, which will have studied the
epidemiology of the most prevalent types of incidents in the country. The Ministry of Health
should continuously update this system to take into account new and emerging threats.

As well as supporting preparedness, such a system will assist the efficient allocation and
application of resources as an incident develops.

Early warning systems
As should be specified within the National Mass Casualty Management Plan (in coordination
with national emergency management systems), that the surveillance function should include
the provision of early warnings when potential incidents – including natural events such as
floods and volcanic eruption – or other worrying trends are identified. This will require the
creation of protocols for triggering warnings and the chain of command that needs to be
informed.

National early warning systems should have agreements and working arrangements with their
counterparts in neighboring countries, with regional structures (i.e., those grouping countries in
cooperative arrangements), and with international organizations like WHO. This will permit
efficient cooperation between countries should the scale or location of a given mass casualty
incident warrant it.

As much as possible, this cooperation should have a practical orientation, with an emphasis on
activities such as joint drills and exercises, regional training and technical networks. WHO
Regional offices can facilitate such activities, offer training in relevant subjects, and obtain
examples of plans or protocols being used in the region or internationally.

Financial and material resources

As well as creating a National Mass Casualty Management Plan, the Ministry of Health must
ensure that it has done a detailed costing of the Plan, as well as estimating costs of responding
to the most probable mass casualty incidents. This will include the resources used at local and
provincial/state levels, as well as those for which the national level retains operational
responsibility.

If the Ministry’s current budget does not cover the necessary costs needed to conduct and support
the activities specified in the Plan, the Ministry should consider making a request for a special
budgetary allocation from the national government. The baseline analysis will be a source of
solid evidence which can be used to justify the request. Other sources such as international
donors should also be considered.

Stockpiling
Depending on the size and topography of the country, the Ministry of Health should consider
prepositioning resources (facilities, staff, supplies and equipment) close to risk areas. This will
speed up the delivery of tiered assistance, and avoid over-reliance upon a few centralized
facilities and on transportation infrastructure that may themselves be damaged in the event of a
natural or man-made major emergency.

The mobilization, transport and deployment of these stockpiled resources must be carefully
planned.

Protection of the resources against natural and man-made hazards must be carefully considered
in such plans, as well as the safety and security of staff and facilities.

Continuous monitoring of expiration of supplies and equipment is important in order to maintain
quality and to permit updating and planning for future replenishment of these vital resources.




Evaluating first aider’s response to the situation
Figure 11: First Aid: What is a First Aider?




http://2.bp.blogspot.com/sUtTekxc550/T9ySbkShbzI/AAAAAAAAAAM/nJTvZ_Uv_bg/s280
/1.gif




First aid is the help given to someone who is injured or ill to keep them safe and to cause no
further harm. The role of a first aider is to give someone this help. Learn what to do.

Assess the situation quickly and calmly.

Safety: check whether you or the casualty is in any danger. Is it safe to approach them? (Are you
wearing protective equipment?)

Scene: find out what caused the accident or situation and how many casualties there are.

Situation: find out what’s happened, how many people are involved and how old they are. Are
there any children or elderly?

Protect yourself and them from any danger.

Always protect yourself first – never put yourself at risk.

Only move them if leaving them would cause them more harm.

If you can’t make an area safe, call 999 or 112 for emergency help.

Prevent infection between you and them.

Wash your hands with soap and water or rub your hands with alcohol gel.
Wear disposable, latex free gloves. Do not touch an open wound without gloves on. If you do
not have any gloves, you could use clean plastic bags or ask the casualty to dress the wound if
they are able.

Do not breathe, cough or sneeze over a wound or casualty.

Comfort and reassure.

Stay calm and take charge of the situation.

Introduce yourself to them to help gain their trust.

Explain the situation and anything you’re going to do before you do it.

Treat the casualty with dignity and respect at all times.

Assess the casualty and give first aid treatment.

If there’s more than one casualty make sure you help those with life-threatening conditions first.

Use the primary survey to deal with any life-threatening conditions. When these have been dealt
with successfully move on to the secondary survey.

Arrange for help if needed.

Call 999 or 112 for an ambulance if you think it’s serious.




Qualities of a Good First Aider

There are a whole range of skills that are beneficial for a first aider to have in order to deal with
situations in the best way possible. Some qualities of a good first aider are:

Communication Skills
If you are able to communicate effectively with the injured person, they will be much more
likely to trust you and feel reassured. You will calm their sense of panic and make the situation
a lot easier for you both. Having strong communication skills is also advantageous should you
have to relay important information to the emergency services.

The Ability to Work under Pressure

The demands of a first aider can range anywhere from something simple, like a cut finger, to
something a lot more serious, like a cardiac arrest. As a first aider you must be prepared for all
possibilities, and know how to react quickly to the situation. You must keep calm – panicking
will only make the situation worse – and be able to work effectively under pressure.

Initiative and Leadership

In an emergency, time can often play a crucial part in the outcome. Being able to act quickly,
take the lead, use your initiative and trust your judgment are all vital skills.

The Ability to Work in a Team

As well as being able to lead, it is important that you can work effectively in a team. You may
have to work alongside the emergency services, and being able to co-operate with them is vital.

Positivity

Someone who always sees the glass as half full rather than half empty is a prime candidate for
a first aider. Positivity will help you to reassure the injured person and prevent yourself from
quickly becoming mentally drained while on the job.

Learning Activities

Practical Activities

You work as a first aider in organization Y. You have received an emergency call from nearby
highway that a public transport has been involved in an accident and the casualties are badly
injured. Demonstrate your role as a first aider responding for that emergency once you reach at
the scene of the accident?

Self-Assessment
 You are provided with the following questions for self -assessment, attempt them and check your
 responses

You are a first aider working for a busy hospital in your county. The hospital management has
asked you to prepare a planning process for evaluating response of the casualty to the
intervention. Which important factor would you consider while designing the planning process?

The WHO’s Health Action in Crises (HAC) has recently elaborated a five-year strategy to build
the capacity of the health sector and communities in emergency preparedness and risk reduction.
What are the four pillars of this strategy?

What are the guiding principles designed to assist planners, policymakers, and implementing
agencies as they develop plans for emergency response and risk reduction?

No matter what forms that government and public administration take in addressing the
emergency response and risk reduction, national emergency management systems should
include which essential factors while planning for emergency response and risk reduction?

Why is it important to involve the Ministry of Health in all national emergency management
potentially dealing with mass casualties?

What roles does the ministry of health play in the emergency management of disasters?

Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials
                                             Emergency room                First Aid
      Casualty
                                             Emergency room                 Manual.
       department
                                              standard manuals              Tweezers
      Functional skills
                                             Emergency                     Alcohol Swabs
       laboratory
                                              trolley                       Antibiotic
      First aid kit
                                                                             Ointment
   Bandages               Waste disposal      Presentation
   Gauze Pads              bins                 charts
   Medical Tape           Personal            Flip charts
   Elastic Bandages        protective
   Pain relievers          equipment
   Instant cold pack      Health workers
References

Jevon, P. & Ewens, B. (2012) Monitoring the Critically Ill Patient, 3rd Edition, Wiley-
Blackwell, Oxford

Peitzman A.B., et al. (2012) The Trauma Manual, 2nd edition. Philadelphia, Pa., Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.

Rapid Response to Everyday Emergencies (2016) A Nurse's Guide. Philadelphia, Pa., Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.

Royal College of Nursing (2017) Record Keeping: The Facts, RCN, viewed 28 May 2018,
https://www.rcn.org.uk/professional-development/publications/pub-006051
4.2.1.7 MODEL ANSWERS

Self-Assessment
 You are provided with the following questions for self -assessment, attempt them and check your
 responses
 You are a first aider working for a busy hospital in your county. The hospital management has
 asked you to prepare a planning process for evaluating response of the casualty to the
 intervention. Which important factor would you consider while designing the planning process?

 Project definition: determines the aim, objectives and scope of an emergency plan, and decides
 the tasks and the resources required to performing these tasks.

 Formation of a representative planning group: to gather the required information and to gain the
 commitment of key people and organizations, both of which will contribute to the successful
 implementation of the plan.

 Potential problem analysis: through breaking the problem into its components to examine risks,
 their causes, possible preventive strategies, response and recovery strategies, and trigger events
 for these strategies.

 Resource analysis: to identify the required resources for the response and recovery strategies,
 resources available, discrepancy between requirement and availability, and responsibility.

 Designation of roles and responsibilities to individuals and organizations.

 Management structure concerning the command of individual organizations and control across
 organizations.

 Developing strategies and systems for specific response and recovery.

 Documentation: The written emergency plan will consist of the outputs of each step of the
 process.

 The WHO’s Health Action in Crises (HAC) has recently elaborated a five-year strategy to build
 the capacity of the health sector and communities in emergency preparedness and risk reduction.
 What are the four pillars of this strategy?

 Assessing and monitoring baseline information on the status of health emergency preparedness
 and risk management at regional and country levels
Institutionalizing emergency preparedness and risk management in ministries of health and
establishing an effective all-hazard/ whole-health programme for this purpose

Encouraging and supporting community-based emergency preparedness and risk management

Improving knowledge and skills in health emergency preparedness and response, and risk
management.

What are the guiding principles designed to assist planners, policymakers, and implementing
agencies as they develop plans for emergency response and risk reduction?

Clear lines of responsibility

All-hazard applicability

Scalability

Whole-of-health

Knowledge-based

Multi-sectoral collaboration

National policies which enable local solutions

No matter what forms that government and public administration take in addressing the
emergency response and risk reduction, national emergency management systems should
include which essential factors while planning for emergency response and risk reduction?

Identification of lines of authority, from the national to the local level

Financial arrangements for funding emergency work

Arrangements to ensure that government and community activities are maintained (for example,
creation of parallel or “hardened” communications systems to take over if normal voice or data
transfer systems are affected)

National stockpiling of appropriate resources (including provincial or state and local
prepositioning of stockpiles)

Database of national experts for advice on specific problems
Protocols and formal arrangements for coordinated efforts with other countries, or between
provincial/state governments within the country.

Why is it important to involve the Ministry of Health in all national emergency management
potentially dealing with mass casualties?

Because of its expertise in the setting of health-related standards and rules and procedures

Because of its normative role in the setting of health-related standards and rules and procedures

What roles does the ministry of health play in the emergency management of disasters?

Inter-ministry cooperation

Establishing a solid legal basis

Establishing the baseline data for disaster management

Hazard analysis and risk management

Monitoring system capacity

Surveillance, epidemiology and data collection

Developing early warning systems

Establishing financial and material resources

Stockpiling- prepositioning resources (facilities, staff, supplies and equipment) close to risk
areas.
  Learning Outcome 4 Wind-up first aid intervention

Introduction to the learning outcome

This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to wind-up first aid
intervention. It includes documentation, waste management and report writing

Performance Standard
   i.   Documented first aid situation as per first aid principles
  ii.   Cleared first aid area as per first aid principles
 iii.   Disposed off materials in regard to SOPs
 iv.    Stored recyclable materials as per manufacturer’s instructions and workplace policy

Information Sheet

Definition of Terms

Casualty- the department of a hospital providing immediate treatment for emergency cases

First Aid- is the first and immediate assistance given to any person suffering from either a minor
or serious illness or injury, with care provided to preserve life, prevent the condition from
worsening, or to promote recovery

Emergency services- are the public organizations whose job is to take quick action to deal with
emergencies when they occur, especially the fire brigade, the police, and the ambulance service.

Injury- also known as physical trauma is damage to the body caused by external force. This may
be caused by accidents, falls, hits, weapons, and other causes.

Medical waste is defined as: potentially infectious waste materials generated at health care
facilities, such as hospitals, clinics, physician's offices, dental practices, blood banks, and
veterinary hospitals/clinics, as well as medical research facilities and laboratories.
Documentation

Introduction

Good record keeping is an important aspect of a health and social care professional’s role, and
it is a fundamental part of health care.

An accurate written record detailing all aspects of patient monitoring is important, not only
because it forms an integral part of the of the provision of care or nursing management of the
patient, but because it also contributes to the circulation of information amongst the different
teams involved in the patient’s treatment or care.




In a legal sense, documentation and record keeping is also there for the protection of the nurse
or healthcare professional.




A well-kept record can protect the practitioner in instances where the legal defence of their
actions is required. Documentation also ensures a matter of professionalization and proof of the
improvement of practices.
Figure 12: Record Keeping and Documentation

https://cdn.ausmed.com/ausmed-blog-images/2018/05/20180528_body.jpg




Types of Record-Keeping Used in Healthcare
  i.   Hand-written records
 ii.   Computer-based systems (electronic)
iii.   Some organizations or employers will use a combination of both.

You’ll be expected to be able to comply with whatever requirements your employer or
organization sets for record-keeping. That means you’ll need to:
Ensure that you are up to date on the information systems and tools in your workplace including
their security, confidentiality and appropriate usage;

Protect any passwords or details given to you to enable your access to any systems;

Make sure written records are not left in public places where unauthorized people might see
them (including any electronic systems or displays);

Ensure that an entry is made in the patient’s medical record whenever a health professional sees
a patient.




Components of a patient’s records include:

Medical records

Nursing records/progress notes

Medication charts

Laboratory orders and reports

Vital signs observation charts

Handover sheets and admission

Discharge and transfer checklists/ letters

Patient’s assessment forms, such as nutrition or pressure area care assessment.




Principles of Good Record Keeping

Some key factors underpin good record keeping. The patient’s records should:
Be factual, consistent and accurate;

Be updated as soon as possible after any recordable event;

Provide current information on the care and condition of the patient;

Be documented clearly in such a way that the text cannot be erased;

Be consecutive and accurately dated, timed and all entries signed (including any alterations);

All original entries should be legible. Draw a clear line through any changes and sign and date;

Not include abbreviations, slang or jargon as not all workplaces or organizations will use the
same terminology;

Records must be stored securely and should only be destroyed following your local policy;

Avoid meaningless phrases, speculation and offensive subjective statements/insulting or
derogatory language;

Identify the patient by recording patient’s name, date of birth and hospital number on each page
of the record (three approved identifiers) or follow your local policies on how to identify
patient’s records;

Still be legible if photocopied or scanned.




Common Deficiencies in Record Keeping

Poor record keeping hampers the care that patients receive and makes it difficult for healthcare
professionals to defend their practice.

The most common deficiencies in record keeping include:

An absence of clarity
Inaccuracies

Spelling mistakes

Missing information

Failure to record action taken when a problem has been identified.




Benefits of Good Record Keeping

Record keeping is a tool for professional practice and one that should help the care process. It is
not separate and not an optional extra to be fitted in if circumstances allow.

A record should be made as soon as possible after the patient is seen or the procedure is
complete. It’s important that accurate record is made in the patient’s notes and should include
interventions and any response to the interventions.

The Importance of Good Record Keeping are:

Record keeping makes the continuity of care easier;

Record keeping promotes better communication and dissemination of information between
members of the multi-professional team;

Helps to address complaints or legal processes;

Supports clinical audit, research, allocation of resources and performance planning;

Helps to identify risks and enables the early detection of complications;

Supports patient care and patient-centered communication;

Supports effective clinical judgement;
Supports delivery of services;

Helps improve accountability;

Shows how decisions were made relating to the patient’s care.




Legal Issues in Record Keeping

The patient’s records are occasionally required as evidence before a court of law, or to
investigate a complaint at a local, organization level.

Sometimes records may be requested by professional governing bodies when investigating
claims related to misconduct

Therefore, you must take care about what you write. Not only will you be asked to formally
explain your records in the event of, for instance, a complaint from a patient/client, but registered
nurses have both a professional and legal duty of care.

It is therefore critical to keep up-to-date with the legal requirements and best practices of record-
keeping, proving that:

A comprehensive nursing assessment of the patient has been undertaken including care that has
been provided and planned;

Relevant information is included together with any actions that have been taken in response to
changes in patients’ conditions;

The duty of care to the patient has been provided and that no acts or omissions have
compromised a patient’s safety;

Arrangements have been made for the ongoing care of the patient.
Waste Management

Types of Waste




Figure 13: Medical Waste for Disposal - Infection Risk Editorial Photo - Image of rubbish,
medical waste

   https://images.app.goo.gl/NkDZCPNspmoXbKYN7

Infectious waste: waste contaminated with blood and other bodily fluids (e.g. from discarded
diagnostic samples),cultures and stocks of infectious agents from laboratory work (e.g. waste
from autopsies and infected animals from laboratories), or waste from patients with infections
(e.g. swabs, bandages and disposable medical devices);
Pathological waste: human tissues, organs or fluids, body parts and contaminated animal
carcasses;

Sharps waste: syringes, needles, disposable scalpels and blades, etc.;

Chemical waste: for example solvents and reagents used for laboratory preparations,
disinfectants, sterilants and heavy metals contained in medical devices (e.g. mercury in broken
thermometers) and batteries;

Pharmaceutical waste: expired, unused and contaminated drugs and vaccines;

Cytotoxic waste: waste containing substances with genotoxic properties (i.e. highly hazardous
substances that are, mutagenic, teratogenic or carcinogenic), such as cytotoxic drugs used in
cancer treatment and their metabolites;

Radioactive waste: such as products contaminated by radionuclides including radioactive
diagnostic material or radio therapeutic materials; and

Non-hazardous or general waste: waste that does not pose any particular biological, chemical,
radioactive or physical hazard.

The major sources of health-care waste are:

hospitals and other health facilities

laboratories and research centers

mortuary and autopsy centers

animal research and testing laboratories

blood banks and collection services

nursing homes for the elderly

Health Care Risks of Hospital Wastes
Potentially harmful microorganisms that can infect hospital patients, health workers and the
general public

Drug-resistant microorganisms which spread from health facilities into the environment.

Sharps-inflicted injuries;

Toxic exposure to pharmaceutical products, in particular, antibiotics and cytotoxic drugs
released into the surrounding environment, and to substances such as mercury or dioxins, during
the handling or incineration of health care wastes;

Chemical burns arising in the context of disinfection, sterilization or waste treatment activities;

Air pollution arising as a result of the release of particulate matter during medical waste
incineration;

Thermal injuries occurring in conjunction with open burning and the operation of medical waste
incinerators; and

Radiation burns.

Environmental Impact of Waste Disposal and Treatment

The disposal of untreated health care wastes in landfills can lead to the contamination of
drinking, surface, and ground waters if those landfills are not properly constructed.

The treatment of health care wastes with chemical disinfectants can result in the release of
chemical substances into the environment if those substances are not handled, stored and
disposed in an environmentally sound manner.

Incineration of waste has been widely practiced, but inadequate incineration or the incineration
of unsuitable materials results in the release of pollutants into the air and in the generation of
ash residue. Incinerated materials containing or treated with chlorine can generate dioxins and
furans, which are human carcinogens and have been associated with a range of adverse health
effects. Incineration of heavy metals or materials with high metal content (in particular lead,
mercury and cadmium) can lead to the spread of toxic metals in the environment.

Only modern incinerators operating at 850-1100 °C and fitted with special gas-cleaning
equipment are able to comply with the international emission standards for dioxins and furans.

Alternatives to incineration such as autoclaving, microwaving, steam treatment integrated with
internal mixing, which minimize the formation and release of chemicals or hazardous emissions
should be given consideration in settings where there are sufficient resources to operate and
maintain such systems and dispose of the treated waste.

Waste management: Reasons for Failure

Lack of awareness about the health hazards related to health-care waste

Inadequate training in proper waste management

Absence of waste management and disposal systems

Insufficient financial and human resources and the low priority given to the topic are the most
common problems connected with health-care waste.

Many countries either do not have appropriate regulations, or do not enforce them.

The Way Forward

The management of health-care waste requires increased attention and diligence to avoid
adverse health outcomes associated with poor practice, including exposure to infectious agents
and toxic substances.

Key elements in improving health-care waste management are:

Promoting practices that reduce the volume of wastes generated and ensure proposer waste
segregation;
Developing strategies and systems along with strong oversight and regulation to incrementally
improve waste segregation, destruction and disposal practices with the ultimate aim of meeting
national and international standards;

Where feasible, favoring the safe and environmentally sound treatment of hazardous health care
wastes (e,g, by autoclaving, microwaving, steam treatment integrated with internal mixing, and
chemical treatment) over medical waste incineration;

Building a comprehensive system, addressing responsibilities, resource allocation, handling and
disposal. This is a long-term process, sustained by gradual improvements;

Raising awareness of the risks related to health-care waste, and of safe practices; and

Selecting safe and environmentally-friendly management options, to protect people from
hazards when collecting, handling, storing, transporting, treating or disposing of waste.

WHO Response

WHO developed the first global and comprehensive guidance document, Safe management of
wastes from health-care activities, now in its second edition and more recently a short guide
that summarizes the key elements.

Safe management of wastes from health-care activities

The guide addresses aspects such as;

Regulatory framework

Planning issues

Waste minimization and recycling

Handling of waste

Storage and transportation
Treatment and disposal options

Training.

The document is aimed at managers of hospitals and other health-care facilities, policy makers,
public health professionals and managers involved in waste management.

In addition, as part of monitoring Sustainable Development Goal 6 on safely managed water and
sanitation, the WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme will regularly report on safe
management of health care waste as part of wider monitoring efforts on water and sanitation in
health care facilities.

Waste Segregation

Segregation means separating different wastes into different color-coded bins with liners or
sharps containers at locations where they are generated, and it is always the first and the most
important activity in the hospital set up.




Color Coded Waste Bins

Red bin—you put highly infectious wastes like blood, blood products, tissues, specimens, blood
giving sets, tooth, amputated body parts etc.

Yellow bin—you put infectious wastes like fluid giving sets, used gloves, empty syringes, vials,
ampules, tubing, wipes, and empty IVs etc.

White bin—you put the food remains e.g. banana peels, fruit remains etc.

Black Bin—you put waste papers like drugs cartons and packages
Figure 14: Color Coded Waste Bins




https://im.indiatimes.in/content/itimes/photo/2015/Jan/6/1420535398-color-coded-waste-
bins-iabv20.jpg?w=1400&h=1050&cc=1
  Figure 15: Sharps Containers - Infection Prevention & Control Associates

  https://images.app.goo.gl/DuxmDTe5zws3MCBc7




Treatment and Disposal of Medical Waste

  The primary methods of treatment and disposal of medical waste are:

  Incineration

  Autoclaves

  Mechanical/Chemical Disinfection

  Microwave
Irradiation

Vitrification

Incineration

Incineration is the controlled burning of the medical waste in a dedicated incinerator. Among
industry professionals, these units are often referred to as hospital/medical/infectious waste
incinerators (HMIWIs).

Autoclaves for Medical Waste




Autoclaves are closed chambers that apply heat and sometimes pressure and steam, over a period
of time to sterilize medical equipment. Autoclaves have been used for a century to sterilize
medical instruments for re-use. Surgical knives and clamps, for instance, are put in autoclaves
for sterilization.

Mechanical Processing and Chemical Disinfection

Mechanical processing can be grinding, shredding, and/or compacting Mechanical treatment
does not kill pathogens or disinfect equipment, but it can reduce waste volume in preparation of
further treatment or disposal.

Chemical disinfection, primarily through the use of chlorine compounds, kills microorganisms
in medical waste and can often oxidize hazardous chemical constituents. Chlorine bleach has
been used for disinfecting processes for years – you might use it to clean your underwear and
kill the E.coli.

Microwave

Microwave radiation is used to treat wastewater sludge and as a heat source to treat medical
waste. Microwave treatment units can be either on-site installations or mobile treatment
vehicles. The processing usually includes front-end shredding of the waste, both to increase the
efficacy of the microwave treatment and to reduce the volume of the end waste for disposal. If
the waste is dry, water is introduced and the wet waste is introduced to the microwave chamber.

Irradiation

Irradiation disinfects waste by exposing it to gamma rays that are fatal to bacteria. A radioactive
isotope of cobalt is employed. This is basically the same radiation source used for radiation
treatment of cancer. In cancer treatment, radiation is intended to kill the malignant cells. In
irradiation for sterilization of equipment or treatment of waste, the radiation is intended to kill
pathogens.

Vitrification

Although it is rarely used, vitrification can be an effective treatment for medical waste. The solid
waste is mixed in when glass is formed (vitrification means production of glass). The high
temperatures kill pathogens and some combustible material may burn or pyrolyze, resulting in
an off-gas. Remaining material is encapsulated in glass, which has a very low diffusivity. There
is little danger of hazardous materials leaching out of glass in significant quantities. The vitrified
waste can therefore be put in a landfill with confidence.

Report Writing

A report is a short, sharp, concise document which is written for a particular purpose and
audience. It generally sets outs and analyses a situation or problem, often making
recommendations for future action. It is a factual paper, and needs to be clear and well-
structured.

Reports generally involve presenting your investigation and analysis of information or an issue,
recommending actions and making proposals.

Requirements for the precise form and content of a report will vary between organization and
departments and in study between courses, from tutor to tutor, as well as between subjects, so
it’s worth finding out if there are any specific guidelines before you start.
There are many different types of reports, including business, scientific and research reports, but
the basic steps for writing them are the same. These are outlined below.

Steps of Report Writing

Step 1: Decide on the 'Terms of reference'

Step 2: Decide on the procedure

Step 3: Find the information

Step 4: Decide on the structure

Step 5: Draft the first part of your report

Step 6: Analyze your findings and draw conclusions

Step 7: Make recommendations

Step 8: Draft the executive summary and table of contents

Step 9: Compile a reference list

Step 10: Revise your draft report




Step 1: Decide on the 'Terms of reference'

To decide on the terms of reference for your report, read your instructions and any other
information you've been given about the report, and think about the purpose of the report:

What is it about?

What exactly is needed?
Why is it needed?

When do I need to do it?

Who is it for, or who is it aimed at?

This will help you draft your Terms of reference.

Step 2: Decide on the procedure

This means planning your investigation or research, and how you'll write the report. Ask
yourself:

What information do I need?

Do I need to do any background reading?

What articles or documents do I need?

Do I need to contact the library for assistance?

Do I need to interview or observe people?

Do I have to record data?

How will I go about this?

Answering these questions will help you draft the procedure section of your report, which
outlines the steps you've taken to carry out the investigation.

Step 3: Find the information

The next step is to find the information you need for your report. To do this you may need to
read written material, observe people or activities, and/or talk to people.
Make sure the information you find is relevant and appropriate. Check the assessment
requirements and guidelines and the marking schedule to make sure you're on the right track. If
you're not sure how the marks will be assigned contact your lecturer.

What you find out will form the basis, or main body, of your report – the findings.

Step 4: Decide on the structure

Reports generally have a similar structure, but some details may differ. How they differ usually
depends on:

The type of report – if it is a research report, laboratory report, business report, investigative
report, etc.

How formal the report has to be.

The length of the report.

Depending on the type of report, the structure can include:

A title page.

Executive summary.

Contents.

An introduction.

Terms of reference.

Procedure.

Findings.

Conclusions.
Recommendations.

References/Bibliography.

Appendices.

The sections, of a report usually have headings and subheadings, which are usually numbered

Step 5: Draft the first part of your report

Once you have your structure, write down the headings and start to fill these in with the
information you have gathered so far. By now you should be able to draft the terms of reference,
procedure and findings, and start to work out what will go in the report’s appendix.

Findings- The findings are result of your reading, observations, interviews and investigation.
They form the basis of your report. Depending on the type of report you are writing, you may
also wish to include photos, tables or graphs to make your report more readable and/or easier to
follow.

Appendices-- As you are writing your draft decide what information will go in the appendix.
These are used for information that:

Is too long to include in the body of the report, or

Supplements or complements the information in the report. For example, brochures,
spreadsheets or large tables.

 Step 6: Analyze your findings and draw conclusions

The conclusion is where you analyze your findings and interpret what you have found. To do
this, read through your findings and ask yourself:

What have I found?

What's significant or important about my findings?
What do my findings suggest?

For example, your conclusion may describe how the information you collected explains why the
situation occurred, what this means for the organization, and what will happen if the situation
continues (or doesn't continue).

Don’t include any new information in the conclusion.

Step 7: Make recommendations

Recommendations are what you think the solution to the problem is and/or what you think
should happen next. To help you decide what to recommend:

Reread your findings and conclusions.

Think about what you want the person who asked for the report should to do or not do; what
actions should they carry out?

Check that your recommendations are practical and are based logically on your conclusions.

Ensure you include enough detail for the reader to know what needs to be done and who should
do it.

Your recommendations should be written as a numbered list, and ordered from most to least
important.

Step 8: Draft the executive summary and table of contents

Some reports require an executive summary and/or list of contents. Even though these two
sections come near the beginning of the report you won't be able to do them until you have
finished it, and have your structure and recommendations finalized.

An executive summary is usually about 100 words long. It tells the readers what the report is
about, and summarize the recommendations.
Step 9: Compile a reference list

This is a list of all the sources you've referred to in the report and uses APA referencing.

Step 10: Revise your draft report

It is always important to revise your work. Things you need to check include:

If you have done what you were asked to do. Check the assignment question, the
instructions/guidelines and the marking schedule to make sure.

That the required sections are included, and are in the correct order.

That your information is accurate, with no gaps.

If your argument is logical. Does the information you present support your conclusions and
recommendations?

That all terms, symbols and abbreviations used have been explained.

That any diagrams, tables, graphs and illustrations are numbered and labeled.

That the formatting is correct, including your numbering, headings, are consistent throughout
the report.

That the report reads well, and your writing is as clear and effective as possible.

You might need to prepare several drafts before you are satisfied. If possible, get someone else
to check your report.

Learning Activities

Practical Activities
You are in the casualty where you provide first aid services to patients on daily basis but there
is a problem of waste segregation in your unit. Perform waste segregation in your unit according
to WHO standard?

Self-Assessment
You are provided with the following questions for self -assessment, attempt them and check your
responses

You are working in the emergency room in organization X. What are the principles of good
record keeping?

What are the components of a patient’s record?

What is the importance of good record keeping?

Hospital wastes if not well handled can pose a great danger to the health workers. What are some
of the health care risks of hospital wastes?

What are some of the key elements in improving health-care waste management?

Medical wastes need prompt treatment and disposal using the most effective methods and
technology to ensure a safe environment. As a health worker, what are the primary methods of
treatment and disposal of medical wastes?

You have been tasked with the responsibility of writing a medical report about the operation in
your unit. What are the steps of report writing that can ensure you write a good report?




4.3.5 Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials

Casualty department

Functional skills laboratory

First aid kit
Emergency room

Emergency room standard manuals

Emergency trolley

First Aid Manual.

Tweezers

Alcohol Swabs

Antibiotic Ointment

Bandages

Gauze Pads

Medical Tape

Elastic Bandages

Pain relievers

Instant cold pack

Waste disposal bins

Personal protective equipment

Health workers

Presentation charts

Flip charts
References

Jevon, P. & Ewens, B. (2012) Monitoring the Critically Ill Patient, 3rd Edition, Wiley-
Blackwell, Oxford

Peitzman A.B., et al. (2012) The Trauma Manual, 2nd edition. Philadelphia, Pa., Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.

Rapid Response to Everyday Emergencies (2016) A Nurse's Guide. Philadelphia, Pa., Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.

Royal College of Nursing (2017) Record Keeping: The Facts, RCN, viewed 28 May 2018,
https://www.rcn.org.uk/professional-development/publications/pub-006051
4.3.7 MODEL ANSWERS

Self-Assessment
You are provided with the following questions for self -assessment, attempt them and check your
responses



You are working in the emergency room in organization X. What are the principles of good
record keeping?

Be factual, consistent and accurate;

Be updated as soon as possible after any recordable event;

Provide current information on the care and condition of the patient;

Be documented clearly in such a way that the text cannot be erased;

Be consecutive and accurately dated, timed and all entries signed (including any alterations);

All original entries should be legible. Draw a clear line through any changes and sign and date;

Not include abbreviations, slang or jargon as not all workplaces or organizations will use the
same terminology;

Records must be stored securely and should only be destroyed following your local policy;

Avoid meaningless phrases, speculation and offensive subjective statements/insulting or
derogatory language;

Identify the patient by recording patient’s name, date of birth and hospital number on each page
of the record (three approved identifiers) or follow your local policies on how to identify
patient’s records;

Still be legible if photocopied or scanned.

What are the components of a patient’s record?

Medical records

Nursing records/progress notes
Medication charts

Laboratory orders and reports

Vital signs observation charts

Handover sheets and admission

Discharge and transfer checklists/ letters

Patient’s assessment forms, such as nutrition or pressure area care assessment.

What is the importance of good record keeping?

Record keeping makes the continuity of care easier;

Record keeping promotes better communication and dissemination of information between
members of the multi-professional team;

Helps to address complaints or legal processes;

Supports clinical audit, research, allocation of resources and performance planning;

Helps to identify risks and enables the early detection of complications;

Supports patient care and patient-centered communication;

Supports effective clinical judgement;

Supports delivery of services;

Helps improve accountability;

Shows how decisions were made relating to the patient’s care.

Hospital wastes if not well handled can pose a great danger to the health workers. What are some
of the health care risks of hospital wastes?

Potentially harmful microorganisms that can infect hospital patients, health workers and the
general public

Drug-resistant microorganisms which spread from health facilities into the environment.
Sharps-inflicted injuries;

Toxic exposure to pharmaceutical products, in particular, antibiotics and cytotoxic drugs
released into the surrounding environment, and to substances such as mercury or dioxins, during
the handling or incineration of health care wastes;

Chemical burns arising in the context of disinfection, sterilization or waste treatment activities;

Air pollution arising as a result of the release of particulate matter during medical waste
incineration;

Thermal injuries occurring in conjunction with open burning and the operation of medical waste
incinerators; and

Radiation burns.

What are some of the key elements in improving health-care waste management?

Promoting practices that reduce the volume of wastes generated and ensure proposer waste
segregation;

Developing strategies and systems along with strong oversight and regulation to incrementally
improve waste segregation, destruction and disposal practices with the ultimate aim of meeting
national and international standards;

Where feasible, favoring the safe and environmentally sound treatment of hazardous health care
wastes (e,g, by autoclaving, microwaving, steam treatment integrated with internal mixing, and
chemical treatment) over medical waste incineration;

Building a comprehensive system, addressing responsibilities, resource allocation, handling and
disposal. This is a long-term process, sustained by gradual improvements;

Raising awareness of the risks related to health-care waste, and of safe practices; and

Selecting safe and environmentally-friendly management options, to protect people from
hazards when collecting, handling, storing, transporting, treating or disposing of waste.

Medical wastes need prompt treatment and disposal using the most effective methods and
technology to ensure a safe environment. As a health worker, what are the primary methods of
treatment and disposal of medical wastes?
Incineration

Autoclaves

Mechanical/Chemical Disinfection

Microwave

Irradiation

Vitrification

You have been tasked with the responsibility of writing a medical report about the operation in
your unit. What are the steps of report writing that can ensure you write a good report?

Step 1: Decide on the 'Terms of reference'

Step 2: Decide on the procedure

Step 3: Find the information

Step 4: Decide on the structure

Step 5: Draft the first part of your report

Step 6: Analyze your findings and draw conclusions

Step 7: Make recommendations

Step 8: Draft the executive summary and table of contents

Step 9: Compile a reference list

Step 10: Revise your draft report
                                         CHAPTER FIVE

                        APPLICATION OF MEDICAL-LEGAL ETHICS
Unit of learning code HE/CU/TT/CM/05/6

Related Unit of Competency in Occupational Standard Applying Medical Legal Ethics in
Operational Theatre Technology

Introduction to the unit of learning

This unit standard specifies the competencies required to apply medical legal ethics in POTT. It
involves acquiring knowledge on the medical-legal and ethical issues, applying medical-legal
ethics, and liaising with law enforcement team. It also involves documenting medical legal
ethical issues in POTT.

Summary of Learning Outcomes
   i.     Acquire knowledge medical- legal ethics in POTT
 ii.      Apply medical legal ethics in POTT
 iii.     Liaise with law enforcement team on medical legal and ethical issues
 iv.      Document medical legal- ethical issues in POTT



        Learning Outcome 1: Acquire knowledge medical- legal ethics in POTT
Introduction to the learning outcome

This learning outcome specifies the roles and responsibilities of PTT staff as per WHO,
relevant regulations/laws and workplace policy . It includes ethics deals with how providers
apply a moral code of conduct to patients in a healthcare setting, taking into account the patients’
self respect, individuality, safety and welfare.

Performance Standard
   i.     Roles and responsibilities of PTT staff are identified as per WHO, relevant
          regulations/laws and workplace policy.
 ii.    Medical- legal and ethical issues in PT are identified as per the WHO and relevant
        sources of law.
 iii.   Medical legal guidelines are acquired in accordance with workplace policy and relevant
        laws.
Information Sheet

Definition of terms

applied ethics - the practical application of moral standards to the conduct of individuals
involved in organizations

bioethicists - persons who specialize in the field of bioethics

bioethics - also called biomedical ethics, the moral dilemmas and issues of advanced medicine
and medical research

comparable worth - also known as pay equity, the theory that extends equal pay requirements to
all persons doing equal work

compassion - ability to have a gentle, caring attitude toward patients and fellow employees

cost/benefit analysis - also called utilitarianism, an ethical approach in which the benefit of the
decision should outweigh the costs

empathy - the ability to understand the feelings of another person without actually experiencing
the pain or distress that person is going through

ethics - the branch of philosophy relating to morals and moral principles

integrity - the unwavering adherence to one's principles; dediication to maintaining high
standards

laws - rules or actions prescribed by a governmental authority that have a binding legal force

medical ethics - moral conduct based on principles regulating the behavior of healthcare
professionals
medical etiquette - standards of professional behavior that physicians use for conduct with other
physicians

medical practice acts - laws established in all 50 states that define the practice of medicine as
well as requirements and methods for licensure in a particular state.

Morality - the quality of being virtuous or practicing the right conduct

principles of autonomy - right to make decisions about one's own life

principle of beneficence - in doing good, we must not harm patients while we are trying to help
them. Principle of justice warns us that equals must be treated equally

principle of non-malfeasance - means "first do not harm"

quality assurance - gathering and evaluating information about the services provided as well as
the results achieved and comparing this information with an accepted standard

sanctity of life - sacredness of human life; all human beings must be protected.

sexual harassment - unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors

sympathy - pity for someone else

tolerance - respect for those whose opinions, practices, race, religion, or nationality differ from
our own

administrative law - a branch of law that covers regulations set by government agencies

assault - imminent apprehension of bodily harm

battery - requires bodily harm and unlawful touching (touching w/o consent of patient)

breach - neglect of an understanding between two parties; failing to perform a legal duty

breach of contract - the failure, without legal excuse, to perform any promise or to carry out any
of the terms of an agreement; failure to perform a contractual duty.

case law - also called common law; case law is based on decisions made by judges
civil law - all law that is not criminal, including the law of torts (personal wrongs) and contract,
property, maritime, and commercial law.




Competent - capable of making a decision without mental confusion due to drugs, alcohol, or
other reasons

constitutional law - the inviolable rights, privileges, or immunities secured and protected for
each citizen by the Constitution of the United States or by the constitution of each state

contract law - that division of law that includes enforceable promises and agreements between
two or more persons to do or not to do a particular thing.

criminal law - those laws intended to protect society from
the wrongdoing of an individual

defendant - person or group of people sued civilly or prosecuted criminally in a court of law

plaintiff - the person or party who brings a case to court

regulations - rules or laws made by agencies

tort law - Law that deals with harm to a person or a person's property.

Confidentiality - professionals involved in the patient's care, or under subpoena, or in a court of
law, or when the patient has signed a release of confidentiality

medicare - health care for people over the age of 65

national practitioners data bank (NPDB) - a listing of names that assists with peer review of
physicians.

preferred provider organization (PPO) - a managed care concept in which the patient must use a
medical provider who is under contract with the insurer for an agreed-upon fee in order to
receive co-payment form the insurer.
primary care physician (PCP) - HMO-designated physician to manage and control an enrolled
patient's medical care.




Sources of Law

The sources of law are the origin or where specific laws derive their source from. In the world
over, laws have been found to derive their source from the constitutions, Judicial decree, religion
and relevant legislation i.e. parliamentary acts.




Customs - Customs play an important role in the framing of the laws. Most of the laws that came
from customs are recognized by state later. Since ancient period we can notice that the dispute
among tribals were resolved by the head of the Tribes using their customs and traditions.
Customs became laws when tribes extended into the formation of state. State cannot actually
ignore the customs of the country. The common law of England for example sprang mainly from
customs.For example Bull-Taming sport culture of Tamils of India resulted into the creation of
Jallikattu Law in 2017. (Read the box for more information about Jallikattu Law of 2017)

Religion - The religion practiced by Primitive communities played a decisive role in evolving the
laws of the state later. Religion was a basis of law for most of the nation. The origin of Hindu
law can be traced in the code of Manu. The origin of Mohammedian law can be traced in Sharia
law. Divine law is a law revealed through man from God. God is the ultimate source of divine
law. For Christians Ten Commandments were the first law given by the Lord Almighty to his
people and was considered as the basis of law. “Indeed the early law of Rome was little more
than a body of technical religious rules, a system of means for obtaining religious rights through
the proper carrying out of certain religious formulas”. -Woodrow Wilson

Judicial decisions - Gettell maintains that the ‘state arose not as the creator of law but as the
interpreter and enforcer of custom’. The function of the Judiciary is to interpret and declare the
law. While discharging its function the judiciary creates new laws. The laws later gets
recognized by the state. Judicial decisions thus became an another source of law. Some time the
verdict of High Court and Supreme Court are treated as laws.

Equity - When laws are ambiguous and do not fit in, the principles of equity are applied and
cases are decided according to common sense and fairness. “Equity is a body of rules existing by
the side of the original civil law, founded on distinct principles and claiming incidentally to
supersede the civil law in virtue of a superior sanctity inherent in those principles.” - Sir Henry
Maine




Scientific commentaries - Another source of law are scientific commentaries. when the
commentary appears it is understood only as an argument, later on its authority is recognized as
more authoritative than the Judicial decision.

Legislature - Most of the laws in the modern times are framed by legislature and it is one of the
most important source of law. Indian constitution is a classical example where the best
provisions of other constitutions are borrowed and made it available for the best of our
nation“The state is founded on the minds of its citizens, who are moral agents.. a bad people
means a bad state and a bad laws.”




Types Of Laws
Criminal Law

Health care in hospital institutions have progressed and improved quality, but it is still
inseparable from the public spotlight. Even though, there are many laws and regulations that
regulate health care and criminal law in medical field. In the Criminal Code regulated about
several criminal law in the medical field. Then, to follow the development of the community, so
special legislation in the health field was established, such as Law Number 36 Year 2009 on
Health, Law Number 44 Year 2009 on Hospitals, Law Number 29 Year 2004 on Medical
Practice. In Law Number 36 Year 2009 on Health in Article 2 it is stated that health development
is carried out based on humanity, balance, benefits, protection, respect for rights and obligations,
justice, gender and non-discrimination and religious norms. Criminal laws are used to punish a
defendant on behalf of the state and the public and deter future criminal behavior. Because
criminal charges do not compensate victims of preventable harms, those individuals may have to
pursue an action in civil court for damages. The same criminal defendant can become a civil
defendant simultaneously, and a state or federal court must apply completely different legal
standards for finding an injury and compensating a plaintiff patient.




Tort law

Tort law seeks to compensate victims of certain actions or inactions based on the breach of a
legal duty that caused damages. Plaintiff patients seeking redress for a preventable harm can file
a tort, or personal injury, suit in state or federal court and must establish that the defendant's
action met the standards for the criteria of duty, breach, causation, and damages. The defendant
provider or facility then may present evidence to defend the suit and show that these four
requirements were not met.

In tort law, providers and facilities connected to a preventable harm can be named in a suit as
defendants based on their respective roles and duties; accordingly, employers may be vicariously
liable for employees’ actions, corporate entities can be held liable for their affiliated facilities,
and providers can be jointly and severally liable for actions for which they each held
responsibility (Insco v. Aetna Health and Life Ins. Co., 2009). State courts use case law decisions
that penalize defendants and compensate plaintiffs to uphold “private rights of action.” These
decisions could have consequences for future plaintiffs with the same complaints.

For healthcare providers and facilities sued based on the failure to meet a certain “standard of
care,” the legal standard of care does not equate directly to a medical standard of care. The legal
standard simply asks that a provider follow the same course as a reasonable provider would
under the same circumstances: there are no technical requirements as in a medical standard of
care (Moffett and Moore, 2011). A jury that finds that the requirements for a tort suit are met will
find the defendant liable for the plaintiff's damages. These damages may be considered
“compensatory,” reflecting the monetizable damages sustained, or “punitive,” scaled to
effectively penalize the defendant.

Laws of Contract

Contract law issues such as non-compete agreements, call schedules, tail insurance,
compensation methods, and ownership of patient records must be carefully evaluated,
understood and often negotiated and changed in order to create a work environment where the
employees’ and employers’ needs are met. In addition, Stark, Anti-Kickback and other
healthcare laws and regulations often relate to the contract relationship and should be addressed.

Issues that remain unclear or unresolved in employment contracts can often result in irreparable
harm to relationships between the parties with either the healthcare employee or employer
choosing to terminate or not to continue the relationship.

Labour Laws

The employee relations landscape in Kenya is informed by Article 41 of the Constitution of
Kenya 2010, which grants every person the right to fair labour practices, including fair
remuneration, reasonable working conditions, and the right to subscribe to and participate in
trade union activities. Article 24(1) of the Constitution further sets out that the enjoyment of
rights and fundamental freedoms by any person should not prejudice the rights and fundamental
freedoms of others. Health service provision falls within the “essential services” category.
Section 81 (1) of the Labour Relations Act, 2007, defines essential service as, “A service the
interruption of which would endanger the life of a person or health of the population or any part
of the population.” Section 78(1) of the Labour Relations Act, 2007, states that no person should
take part in a strike or lockout if the employee and employer were engaged in an essential
service. Section 81(3) provides that there shall be no strike or lockout for an essential service,
and Section 81(4) provides that any trade dispute in a service listed as essential shall be
adjudicated upon by the Industrial Court. Since the promulgation of the Constitution in 2010,
health workers in the public service have, on several occasions, participated in industrial action.
The escalation of unrest amongst health workers in many counties, which often causes disruption
of health services, is to blame for needless loss of lives. The Ministry of Health is committed to
stemming escalating unrest in the health sector, as well as cultivating cordial relations amongst
health workers, unions, and the health sector leaders. The development of user guide on
employee relations for the health sector in Kenya is a critical step towards meeting this
commitment. The user guide aligns with the Labour Laws and the Constitution of Kenya 2010,
and seek amicable resolution of health workers’ concerns and disputes, providing opportunity for
dialogue at all avenues.




Acts of Parliament related to health

Act No. 21 of 2017 - An Act of Parliament to establish a unified health system, to coordinate the
inter-relationship between the national government and county government health systems, to
provide for regulation of health care service and health care service providers, health products
and health technologies and for connected purposes.

Public Health Officers (Training, Registration and Licensing) Act, 2013

An Act of Parliament to make provision for the training, registration and licensing of public
health officers and public health technicians, to regulate their practice, to provide for the
establishment, powers and functions of the Public Health Officers and Public Health Technicians
Council and for connected purposes




Case study
Background: Occasionally, a patient in critical care can die no matter what we do. Others may
have had a good chance of recovery if admitted, but then limited resources impact on admission.
Profound ethical questions confront the medical personnel as they watch and wait helplessly.
Setting: Critical Care Unit, Moi Teaching and Referral Hospital, Eldoret Objectives: To explore
dilemmas on end of life which have a heavy bearing on Doctors and Nurses: legally, morally and
ethically.

Materials and methods: A case study of ZX derived from the local setting involving a patient
who was in the Critical Care Unit for one year sixty five days. This was experiential: a best case
scenario. Consent to highlight and publish the case study was sought from a relative of the
deceased. The case study consist of a content analysis of the patient file, ethical issues arising
were noted and were cross-checked to ensure they reflect the entries in the patient file. This
study seeks to dissect some ethical issues experienced in management of ZX.

Conclusion: Modern health care has given rise to extremely complex and multifaceted ethical
dilemmas. More often the health care workers (Physicians/nurses) are unprepared to manage
these competently. There is no Law or guidelines in Kenya on end-of-life issues, making ethical
dilemmas inevitable. ZX case brings out four topics that pose particularly vexing problems to the
health care givers in their practice of medicine: Respect and equal treatment; Communication
and consent; Decision making for incompetent patients; and end of life issues. Professional
health care providers associations in Kenya should issue pragmatic policy guidelines to
safeguard the Kenyan medics.




Learning Activities

Practical activities

       Identify the roles and responsibilities of perioperative theatre technologist.
       Identify medical- legal issues in PTT.
       Acquire Medical legal guidelines in PTT
       Determine the nature of the offence in PTT
       Identify appropriate enforcement officers for medical legal issues
          Communicate to the enforcement team about a medical legal issue
          Record Medical legal- ethical issues in PTT
          Prepare and disseminated Medical legal- ethical issues reports




Self-Assessment

You are provided with the following questions for self -assessment, attempt them and check your
responses.
   i.      What are the roles and responsibilities of perioperative theatre technologist?
  ii.      Which are th medical- legal issues in PTT?
 iii.      What are the Medical legal guidelines in PTT?
 iv.       What are the nature of offences in PTT?
  v.       Which are the appropriate enforcement officers for medical legal issues?
 vi.       How do you communicate to the enforcement team about a medical legal issue?
vii.       How do you record Medical legal- ethical issues in PTT?
viii.      How do you prepare and disseminated Medical legal- ethical issues reports



Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials

…..Find out as per the set up…….




Learning Outcome 2: Apply medical legal ethics in PTT
Introduction to the learning outcome

This learning outcome specifies competencies in identifying medical legal offences and
implications related to PTT which are applied as per the relevant regulations. The regulations are
identifiable as per the legal system as stipulated in the laws relating to the organization, the
Employment Act and the medical ethics.

Performance standards
   i.   Medical legal offences related to PTT are identified and applied as per given relevant
        regulations/law and work place policy.
 ii.    Medical -legal implications related to PTT are identified as per the work place policy and
        relevant source of law.
 iii.   Medical legal regulations are implemented as per given legal system.




Information Sheet

Law and Morality

Law and morality are two normative systems that control and regulate behaviors in a human
community so as to allow harmonious and effective intersubjectivity between individuals who
recognize one another as bearers of rights. The two notions have their common foundation in
the concept of individual autonomy and equal respect for everyone. They have a
complementary relationship. Law compensates for the functional weaknesses of morality and
morality tempers the mechanical implementation of positive law through the notions of
solidarity and responsibility (Jerome E, 1989). Different legal thinkers have interpreted the
relationship between law and morality in different ways. On the one hand, there are those who
argue that law and morality are independent – though not unrelated. For this first group, a law
cannot be disregarded merely because it is morally indefensible (Alexy,2002). On the other
hand, there are those who maintain that law and morality are interdependent.

The relationship between law and morality can be stated in the following manner:

Law is related to morality in the setting forth of those virtues that are related to the common
good. This does not mean that positive human law should prohibit all vices nor command all
virtues: rather it prohibits only the grosser failings of mankind which threaten the very survival
of society and commands those virtues which can be ordained by human means to the common
good.

Law is related to morality by the moral obligation imposed, i.e., by the necessity of an act in
relation to a necessary end-since law as the command of practical reason necessarily implies an
obligation.
Law is related to morality inasmuch as law is subject to and cannot contradict moral principles,
i.e., natural moral law.

Law is related to morality inasmuch as both stem and are directed by the same source: practical
reason or prudence.




Medical-legal issues and ethics in health

The main legal issues in the healthcare system relate to medical negligence, informed consent
and confidentiality. There are several ethical issues faced by health practitioners and patients in
the healthcare sector

Confidentiality and Privacy of patients - The protection of private patient information is one of
the most important ethical and legal issues in the field of healthcare. Conversations between a
physician and a patient are strictly confidential, as is information about an individual’s medical
condition. Specific provisions of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, or
HIPAA, define exactly what information can be released and to whom.

Healthcare system malpractice and tort reform – The main reason why governments work on
reducing medical malpractice and have implemented tort reform is to reduce expenditure on
unnecessary healthcare services. Besides reducing overall health costs, these reforms can also
lead to a decrease in global malpractice risk.

Physician-assisted Suicide (PAS) and euthanasia – Euthanasia refers to the process of a
deliberately ending a patient’s life in order to relieve them of suffering. It is illegal in most
countries but is still a hotly debated ethical issue surrounding whether it should or should not be
legalized. PAS is the practice of providing a competent patient with a prescription for medication
that will end their life. In this case, the patient would have to self-administer the medication,
directly or through a machine.

Transmission of Diseases - The recent global outbreak of the Corona virus put a renewed
emphasis on the right of healthcare providers to protect themselves from communicable diseases,
whether by direct or indirect contact with an infected patient. Ethical and legal questions arise
when a patient’s health history is not provided to the medical staff.

Informed consent – Informed consent means providing an in-depth understanding of the risks
and benefits of a treatment to a patient. This allows the patient to decide whether or not they
wish to undergo a procedure. Informed consent is based on the principle that patients should
have autonomy over the treatment they receive. Healthcare providers should have a document
providing proof the patient has full knowledge of the risks, benefits and possible consequences
of a particular treatment

Laws relating to persons and organizations

Considering all aspects of health, there are rules that regulate the rights and responsibilities of
governments, health practitioners, organizations, civil society and a country’s population. These
rules make up the legal framework for health. They are classified in different forms including:
statutory laws, regulatory and administrative laws, contracts, case law, and customary laws.
WHO is mandated in making these rules as per every country’s requirement.

Health laws are used to establish commitment to goals, and therefore creating a drive for
action. To achieve health goals, law is required to create different organizations and contracts
that provide health services. In turn, organizations such as health ministries, the private sector or
civil society, have mandates, policies and strategies based on legal rules that guide their work.


There are also many rules that structure what health organizations and individuals should do, and
what they may not do. This interaction between different health laws results in health system
functions being carried out and health products and services being delivered.

Employment law and Employment Act

Some employee relations that relate to the health sector are stipulated as per the following:

Article 41 of the Constitution of Kenya 2010 - Grants every person the right to fair labour
practices, including fair remuneration, reasonable working conditions, and the right to subscribe
to and participate in trade union activities.
Article 24(1) of the Constitution - Sets out that the enjoyment of rights and fundamental
freedoms by any person should not prejudice the rights and fundamental freedoms of others.
Health service provision falls within the “essential services” category.

Section 81 (1) of the Labour Relations Act, 2007 - Defines essential service as, “A service the
interruption of which would endanger the life of a person or health of the population or any part
of the population.”

Section 78(1) of the Labour Relations Act, 2007 - States that no person should take part in a
strike or lockout if the employee and employer were engaged in an essential service.

Section 81(3) of the Labour Relations Act, 2007 - Provides that there shall be no strike or
lockout for an essential service.

Section 81(4) of the Labour Relations Act, 2007 - Provides that any trade dispute in a service
listed as essential shall be adjudicated upon by the Industrial Court.




Health Act, 2017 - Established a unified health system, to coordinate the inter-relationship
between the national government and county government health systems, to provide for
regulation of health care service and health care service providers, health products and health
technologies and for connected purposes

Medical Ethics

Medical ethics involves examining a specific problem, usually a clinical case, and using values,
facts, and logic to decide what the best course of action should be.

Medical ethics are set on a foundation of some core principles which include:

Autonomy

Respecting patients privacy, confidentiality and being truthful about their medical care.

Provide the information and allow the patients to make their own decisions regarding their care .

Honor and respect the patients’ decisions of either accepting or declining care or information.
Beneficence

Do everything good in regard to the patient

Nonmaleficence

Avoid causing injury or suffering to patients

Justice

Treat patients fairly and equitably.

Learning Outcome 3: Liaise with law enforcement team on medical legal and ethical issues
Introduction to the Learning Outcome

This learning outcome specifies competencies in identifying nature of the offences and the liable
enforcement officers as per the laws and the workplace policies. Effective communication to the
enforcement team is also taken as per the communication channels in the administrative
structure.

Performance standard
   i.     Nature of the offence is identified as per given regulations/laws and workplace policy.
 ii.      Enforcement officers are identified according to work place policy and given
          regulations/laws.
 iii.     Communication to the enforcement team is carried out as per communication channels
          and work place policy.




Information Sheet

Enforcement Team

National Police Service

The Article 243 of the constitution of Kenya established Kenya's National Police Service as the
umbrella law enforcement organ in Kenya after a dissolution of Kenya Police Force and
Administration Police Force. The NPS is under the overall and independent command of the
Inspector-General, who is appointed by the President and approved by Parliament.

Medical Practitioners and Dentists Board

The medical Practitioners and dentist board is established by the constitution of Kenya with a
mandate to regulate the practice of medicine, dentistry and medical institutions.

The board’s core functions are as follows:

Training – approval of training institutions for medical and dental practitioners

Registration – Register eligible medical and dental practitioners

Licensing – issue annual license to private practice specialists

Education – Monitor university examinations for medical and dental students.

Inspection – Inspect and accredit institutions for medical and dental training

Organization of the Judiciary

The Judiciary is one of the three arms of government established under chapter 10, Article 159 of
the Constitution of Kenya. It is established as an independent custodian of justice, with the
primary role being to exercise judicial authority. The key functions include:

Administration of justice

Formulation and implementation of judicial policies

Compilation and dissemination of case law and other legal information for the effective
administration of justice

The Court system has been decentralized with the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal
having their own Presidents and the High Court having a Principal Judge as heads of the
respective institutions.The Supreme Court of Kenya is established under Article 163 of the
Constitution of Kenya. It comprises of Seven judges: the Chief Justice, who is the president of
the Court, the Deputy Chief Justice, who is the vice-president of the Supreme Court and five
other judges.

The High Court consists of a number of judges to be prescribed by an Act of Parliament. The
Court is organized and administered in the manner prescribed by an Act of Parliament. The
Court has a Principal Judge, who is elected by the judges of the High Court from among
themselves.

The Judiciary also consists of the Environment and Land Court as well as the Employment and
Labour Relations Court which are courts of equal status as the High Court.

The subordinate courts consists of the Magistrates’ Courts, Kadhis Courts, Court Martial, and
any other court or local Tribunal established by an Act of Parliament.




Health Organization Structure/Protocol

The executive is the Cabinet Secretary in the ministry of health, under which is the Principal
Secretary and then the Director of Medical Services. The Director of Medical Services
coordinates and oversees the functioning of the six departments, whose regulations include:

The Department of Preventive and Promotive Health is further subdivided into six other sectors
tasks with: National Public Health, Disease Surveillance and Epidemic response, non-
communicable diseases, family health, environmental health, and national public health
laboratory independent of each other.
The Curative and Rehabilitation health services handle divisions of national referral services,
forensic & pathology services, emergencies & disaster management, clinical practice and blood
transition.

Standard and Quality assurance docket handles issues of alternative and traditional medicine,
quality assurance, and legislation & regulation.

Health sector coordination & inter-governmental control department manages health sector
intergovernmental affairs and coordination.

The administrative services functions include: monitors office operations such as finance,
accounts, ICT, HRM, SCMD and legal matters.

Department of Policy, Planning and health financing which is the backbone of the Ministry of
Health Kenya manages health policy & planning, Health care financing and the Health
informatics, research development, and Monitoring & evaluation.
https://www.health.go.ke/about-us/organizational-structure/

Leadership and Interpersonal skills

Interpersonal skills help in understanding other people and adjusting your approach to work
together effectively. For example, as a nurse you are required to comfort and care for the patients.
interpersonal skills are therefore integral for the industry, especially empathy and patience.

Unlike technical or “hard” skills, interpersonal skills or “soft” skills are easily transferable
across industries and positions. Employers value interpersonal skills because they contribute to
positive work environments and help maintain an efficient workflow.

The following is a list of interpersonal skills:
Leadership - is an important interpersonal skill that involves effective decision making. Effective
leaders incorporate many other interpersonal skills, like empathy and patience, to make
decisions. Leadership skills can be used by both managers and individual contributors. In any
role, employers value people who take ownership to reach common goals.

Active listening - means listening to others with the purpose of gathering information and
engaging with the speaker. Active listeners avoid distracting behaviors while in conversation
with others. This can mean putting away or closing laptops or mobile devices while listening,
and asking and answering questions when prompted.

Dependability – dependable people can be relied on in any given situation. This can include
anything from being punctual to keeping promises. Employers highly value dependable workers
and trust them with important tasks and duties.

Empathy - A worker’s emotional intelligence is how well they understand the needs and feelings
of others. Employers may hire empathetic or compassionate employees to create a positive, high-
functioning workplace.

Teamwork - The ability to work together as a team is extremely valuable in every
workplace. Teamwork involves many other interpersonal skills like communication, active
listening, flexibility and responsibility. Those who are good team players are often given
important tasks in the workplace and may be seen as good candidates for promotions.




Communication of Medical Legal Issues

Accurate and sensitive communication of health care information is key to effective patient
management in all health care settings. Sensitive health care status of a patient may be
embarrassing if it falls in the wrong hands. Medical ethics of medicine and statutory provisions
emphasize that, the obligation of the physician is to safeguard patient confidences. However,
threats on confidentiality of medical information are very important since communication has
been characterized by growing use of email, facsimile, and the Internet.

Medical legal issues are in three key areas which include:
Confidentiality/breach of privacy - . Conversations between a physician and a patient are strictly
confidential, as is information about an individual’s medical condition (Keers-Sanchez A,2003).

Informed consent – provision of an in-depth understanding of the risks and benefits of a
treatment to a patient is very important. This allows the patient to decide whether or not they
wish to undergo a procedure. Informed consent is based on the principle that patients should
have autonomy over the treatment they receive (Scioscia A,2000).

Defamation - defamation occurs when false words are spoken (slander) or written (libel) to a
third party which exposes the individual to hatred, contempt, ridicule, or which causes the
individual to be shunned or avoided, or which injures the individual or his or her business.
Medical practitioners are especially sensitive to critical comments by patients. While hurtful,
these comments are often opinions and are not necessarily considered defamatory because they
do not contain facts that can be proven untrue (Harsham P,1984).




Administrative skills

Administrative professionals are required office-related tasks. For the most part, they are
required to ensure that all clerical work and customer handling is performed to the highest
standards of professionalism. The following skills are required for effective office
administration:

Communication skills. - Office administrators are required to have proven written and oral
communication skills. This is because, not only will they be the first point of contact to general
public, but will also be required to carry out clerical tasks that involve exceptional levels of
written communication. Spelling, grammar, and sentence structure should be polished to the
highest standards when it comes to office administration.

Filing / paper management - Office administration staff will also need to show their ability to
manage business correspondence. Filing, sorting, and general organization skills are essential for
office administrators. In addition to this, administration staff will also need the ability to organize
their own professional priorities.
Bookkeeping. - General office procedures are necessary for administrative staff, but many
positions will require administration personnel to be familiar with bookkeeping. It is rare that
this is done by hand nowadays, but there are several different computer applications that can be
used to manage financial transactions, including Quicken, Excel, and Turbo Tax.

Typing. - Since ICT is essential for administrative staff in today's era, so too is the ability to type.
Many positions don't denote a specific speed, but general opinion believes this to be around 50
words per minute (wpm) with 100% accuracy. There is no prescribed method of typing, but
those who need to increase their speed may find touch-typing through the “home row” method to
be appropriate for their needs, as it is the most widely taught method of typing and is available in
different software tutorials.

Equipment handling. - Administrative staff may be called upon to do some light to moderate lifting,
so should not see this as an opportunity to avoid laborious tasks. Fortunately, this is rather
limited to tasks such as bringing reams of paper to a copy machine or printer.

Customer service skills. - Having excellent customer service and an orientation towards such traits is
necessary for success as an administration worker. As candidates will be customer facing many
times, they will need to carry themselves with both professionalism and have a pleasant
demeanor.




Research skills. - Administration workers will need to have special talents in research and data
analysis in order to compile reports and harvest research material for other workers within their
department.

Self-motivation. - Administration personnel rarely have management working directly above them
and monitoring their every move. However, any loss of drive or motivation will be immediately
visible to them in terms of the quality of the work being received.

Flexibility. - Administration rarely has two similar days. While personnel can be sure of working a
relatively static schedule within typical business hours, there may be occasions where working
outside of the conventional schedule will be required.
       Learning Outcome 4: Document medical legal- ethical issues in POTT



Introduction to the Learning Outcome

This learning outcome identifies competencies in proper recording, reporting and disseminating
of medical legal-ethical issues to relevant authorities as per work place policy. Appropriate
disposal of waste is key area in medical set up.

Performance standards

  i.     Medical legal- ethical issues are recorded according to work place policy.
 ii.     Medical legal- ethical issues reports are prepared and disseminated to relevant authorities
         as per work place policy.

Information Sheet

Documentation of medical legal and ethical issues

Clear medical record documentation is the key to providing patients with quality care, ensuring
accurate and timely payment for the services furnished, mitigating malpractice risks, and helping
healthcare providers evaluate and plan the patient’s treatment and maintain the continuum of
care (Gutheil TG,1980). Reasons for proper documentation of patients’ medical records
include:

Communicates with other health care personnel - Documentation communicates the quality
of clinical care that providers are delivering to patients and serves as a means to facilitate
the patient navigation continuum of care, from EM to HM and beyond (Gutheil TG,1997).

Reduces risk management exposure - Documentation mitigates risks and reduces the chance of
malpractice. A well-documented record can help alleviate liability concerns in the event of a
claim.
Ensures appropriate reimbursement - A well-documented medical record can facilitate
effective revenue cycle processes, expedite payment, reduce any “hassles” associated with
claims processing, and ensure appropriate reimbursement.




Types of medical records

Patient information sheet - you can find in any medicine bought at a pharmacy. It contains
very important information about the product such as its conditions, side effects, doses or
conservation. A medical and healthcare translator must pay a special attention to the country
regulations and quantities.

Medical history record - A medical history record summarizes a patient’s medical history and
also includes some notes and remarks made by healthcare specialists. It can be used in a clinical
environment, and the medical and healthcare translator should never misunderstand the
contained information.

Discharge Summary - A hospital discharge summary is prepared when a patient checks out of
the hospital. It normally explains the reasons for the hospital admission, the results of the tests
made, and how the patient feels after the discharge – with some medical advices.

Medical test - It includes a blood test, an urine test, a heart test, and many other variants.
Figures, chemical forms, molecules, quantities… everything have to been carefully looked by the
medical and healthcare translator.

Mental Status Examination - It details the results of a mental exam. Is the patient in his/her
right mental abilities? A medical specialist will present the results in an official document which
may required a medical translator.

Operative Report - It is a report prepared to detail the procedures and findings of a surgical
operation. The medical and healthcare translator should avoid any ambiguity and be as clear and
concise as possible.

Report writing and dissemination on medical legal issues
Structured reports support readers to interpret and understand the content of the report and may
reduce subsequent requests for information. A request to provide a medical report will often be
accompanied by a set of questions and/or a template or form. There is generally an accepted
structure for medical reports that can be used when a template or form has not been supplied by
the third party, or when a set of questions has been provided with no instructions. (Seidl I,2011)
The recommended structure below may assist in preparing a comprehensive medical report
(Australian Medical Association. GST, 2014).

Identify yourself and your credentials - The report should state who has prepared its contents
and their scope of expertise. You can achieve this by providing a paragraph overview outlining
your experience and expertise.

Introduce the scope and purpose of the report - The reason for preparation of the report should be
clearly stated, including any questions you have been asked to consider/address.

Outline relevant history, outcomes of physical examination and management strategies - The
report should contain a detailed medical history of events or illnesses that relate to the purpose
for preparing the report. Information on the general state of health or other relevant factors
should also be included, along with the proposed management of the condition.

Provide an opinion and/or respond to questions - This section should include responses to any
specific questions provided by the third party. The process for reaching stated conclusions should
be transparent and substantiated within the report. Providing an outline of the clinical method
employed and the reasoning/justification for your conclusions is recommended.

Principles for Disseminating Research Results

Medical researchers should assess ramifications of their research in an effort to balance the
promise of benefit against potential harms from corrupt application. Only under rare
circumstances should findings be withheld, and then only to the extent required to reasonably
protect against misuse(World Medical Association,2013). To fulfill their ethical responsibilities
with respect to sharing research findings for the ultimate benefit of patients, physicians should:

Advocate for timely and transparent dissemination of research data and findings. Physicians
should not intentionally withhold information for reasons of personal gain.
Report the results of research accurately, including subsequent negative findings. This is
particularly important where the findings do not support the research hypothesis.

Maintain a commitment to peer review.

Disclose sponsorship and conflicts of interest relating to the research, in keeping with ethics
guidance.

Be responsible in their release of research results to the media, ensuring that any information the
researcher provides is prompt and accurate and that informed consent to the release of
information has been obtained from research participants (or participants’ legally authorized
representative when the participant lacks decision-making capacity) prior to releasing any
identifiable information (Schroter S,2014).

Waste Disposal

Sharps disposal is one of the most important duties of any healthcare worker. Proper disposal
keeps us safe from bloodborne pathogens. Improper disposal opens us up to infection and hefty
fines. The key to staying safe from needle sticks and cuts is knowing what sharps are, and how to
dispose of them. A reliable disposal company can carry the lion’s share of the sharps disposal
burden.

Types of medical waste:

Infectious waste: waste contaminated with blood / blood by-products, cultures and stocks of
infectious agents, waste originating from isolation ward patients, discarded diagnostic samples
containing blood and body fluids, infected animals originating from laboratories, and
contaminated materials

   i.   Pathological waste: identifiable human body parts and contaminated animal carcasses.
 ii.    Sharps: disposable scalpels and blades, syringes, needles, etc.
 iii.   Chemicals: mercury, solvents, disinfectants etc.
 iv.    Pharmaceuticals: unused, contaminated, and out-of-date medicines; vaccines and serums.
  v.    Genotoxic waste: very hazardous teratogenic, mutagenic, or carcinogenic waste, such as
        cytotoxic medicines for the treatment of cancer and their metabolites.
 vi.   Radioactive waste: for example glassware contaminated with radioactive diagnostic
       matter or materials used during radiotherapy.
vii.   Heavy metal waste: for example mercury thermometers.

Methods of waste disposal

Incineration - This is the process of burning of waste in temperatures ranging from 1,800°F to
2,000°F (982°C to 1093°C). On-site incineration provides the advantage of a quick, easy
disposal method, but there are emissions concerns.

Autoclaving - Autoclaving, which is also known simply as steam sterilization, is the most
commonly utilized alternative to incineration. It is both less costly and carries no documented
health impacts. In this method, wastes are sterilized or disinfected prior to disposal in a
landfill. Bags of waste are placed in a chamber and steam is introduced for a determined period
of time at a specified pressure and temperature. This assures the destruction of
microorganisms( Pépin J,2014).

Gas sterilization - In this process, medical waste is fed into an evacuated air-tight chamber and
treated with a sterilizing agent (such as ethylene oxide or formaldehyde). The gas that comes into
contact with the waste will kill harmful, infectious agents.

Chemical disinfection - This process involves the use of chemical agents for disinfection, such as
chlorine. Chemical disinfection processes are most appropriate for liquid wastes, although they
can still be used to treat solid wastes. There are a number of factors that should be considered
regarding the effective usage, including: the types and biology of microorganisms in the wastes,
degree of contamination, type of disinfectant used as well as its concentration and quantity,
contact time, and mixing requirements.

Microwave - The application of microwave technology treatment also can disinfect waste. Waste
is first shredded, and then mixed with water and internally heated to neutralize all present
biologicals. Computerized controls are employed to ensure the minimum parameters for
disinfection and proper equipment function. As with autoclaving, approximately 90% of medical
wastes can be treated with this process. The shredding process results in a volume reduction, and
energy use is reportedly lower than that of an incinerator.
Irradiation - This method involves sterilizing waste by exposing it to a cobalt source. Cobalt
gives out gamma radiations that destroy all microbes in waste. The high cost of cobalt and high
operating costs, however, have discouraged commercial ventures from using the technology for
the treatment and management of medical waste. There also have been some questions raised
about the actual process of radiating the material and achieving adequate disinfection. As with
autoclaving and microwave methods, it is not recommended for pathological
wastes(WHO/UNICEF,2015).

Thermal inactivation - This process involves heating waste to temperatures at which infectious
agents are killed. It is used for treating large volumes of liquid clinical wastes. A chamber is
preheated to an intense, specified temperature and held for a specified time, then released.




Ref

Gutheil TG. Paranoia and progress notes: A guide to forensically informed psychiatric record
keeping. Hosp Community Psychiatry. 1980

Gutheil TG. The medical record in the acute care setting and issues of confidentiality. In: Sederer
LL, Rothschild AJ, editors. Acute care psychiatry: Diagnosis and treatment. Baltimore:
Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins; 1997.

Seidl I. Understanding insurance: The GP’s professional and ethical responsibilities. Aust Fam
Physician, 2011;40(6):631–33.

Australian Medical Association. GST, conduct monies and workers compensation. Canberra:
AMA; 2013. Available at https://ama.com.au/ article/gst-conduct-monies-and-workers-
compensation [Accessed 11 July 2014]

World Medical Association. Declaration of Helsinki. 2013. www.wma.net/policies-post/ wma-
declaration-of-helsinki-ethical-principles-for-medical-research-involving-humansubjects.
Schroter S, Price A, Malički M, Richards T, Clarke M. Frequency and format of clinical trial
results dissemination to patients: a survey of authors of trials indexed in PubMed. BMJ Open
2019;9:e032701. 10.1136/bmjopen-2019-032701 31636111

Pépin J, Abou Chakra CN, Pépin E, Nault V, Valiquette L. Evolution of the global burden of
viral infections from unsafe medical injections, 2000-2010.PLoSOne. 2014 Jun 9;9(6):e99677.

WHO/UNICEF,2015. Water, sanitation and hygiene in health care facilities: status in low- and
middle-income countries. World Health Organization, Geneva.

Scioscia A. Critical connection. Phoenix New Times. June 29, 2000.

Harsham P. A misinterpreted word worth $71 million. Medical Economics. 1984;61(5):289-292.

Keers-Sanchez A. Mandatory provision of foreign language interpreters in health care services. J
Legal Med. 2003;24(4):557-578.

Agustina, Enny. (2019). criminal law policy in health care. international journal of research in
law, economic and social sciences. 1. 74-80. 10.32501/injuriless.v1i2.67.




Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services [27 March 2014];Accreditation. 2013

Gostin LO. Public health law in a new century: part I: law as a tool to advance the community's
health. Journal of the American Medical Association. 2000;283(21):2837–2841.

Guh AY, Thompson ND, Schaefer MK, Patel PR, Perz JF. Patient notification for bloodborne
pathogen testing due to unsafe infection practices in the US health care setting, 2001-
2011. Medical Care. 2012;50(9):785–791.

Moffett P, Moore G. The standard of care: legal history and definitions: the bad and good
news. Western Journal of Emergency Medicine. 2011;12(1):109–112.

Siegel JD, Rhinehart E, Jackson M, Chiarello L, Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory
Committee [27 March 2014];2007 Guideline for Isolation Precautions: Preventing Transmission
of Infectious Agents in Healthcare Settings. 2007 available
at: www.cdc.gov/hicpac/pdf/isolation/Isolation2007.pdf.

Wachter RM, Foster NE, Dudley RA. Medicare's decision to withhold payment for hospital
errors: the devil is in the details. The Joint Commission Journal on Quality and Patient
Safety. 2008;34(2):116–123.

Roder-DeWan S, Gage AD, Hirschhorn LR, Twum-Danso NAY, Liljestrand J, Asante-Shongwe
K, et al. (2019) Expectations of healthcare quality: A cross-sectional study of internet users in 12
low- and middle-income countries. PLoS Med 16(8): e1002879.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1002879




Alexy, Robert. 2002. The Argument from Injustice: A Reply to Legal Positivism. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

Bickenbach, Jerome E. 1989. Law and Morality. Law and Philosophy, 8(3), Symposium on
Legitimacy of Law: 291–300.




                                         CHAPTER SIX

        PROVISION OF HEALTH EDUCATION AND PROMOTION SERVICES

  UNIT CODE: HE/CU/TT/CC/06/6/A




  Relationship to Occupational Standards: Provide Health Education and Promotion Services




  Introduction to unit of learning
This unit specifies the competencies required to Provide Health Education and Promotion. It
involves identifying and assessing health education and promotion needs, developing objectives,
planning, implementing, evaluating and documenting health promotion and education activities.
Its main objective is to enlighten a person or a community on healthcare.




Summary of Learning Outcomes

 1. Carry out needs’ assessment on health education and promotion
 2. Develop objectives for health education and promotion
 3. Plan health education and promotion
 4. Implement action plan for health education and promotion
 5. Monitor and evaluate health education and promotion
 6. Document health education and promotion
Learning Outcomes 1: Carry out needs’ assessment for health education and promotion

     Introduction to the learning outcome

     This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to conduct dietary surveys.
     It comprises basics community health assessment techniques, assessing health needs of a patient,
     communication skills in health education and promotion, recording and Presentation assessment
     reports, learning activities, self-assessment questions and answers, learning activities, tools,
     equipment, supplies and materials and references.

     Performance Standard
1.        Tools for needs assessment are identified and gathered as per work place policy and
          WHO standards.
2.        Health education and promotion need is assessed as per WHO standards
3.        Needs assessment report is prepared and filed as per work place policy and WHO
          standards

     Information Sheet

     1.4.1 Basics community health assessment techniques

     Community health assessments (CHAs) include a combination of quantitative demographic and
     health data as well as qualitative data that reflects the experiences and opinions of community
     stakeholders. Summarize and synthesize these data to develop a picture of overall community
     health and to highlight the particular health needs of various populations in your community.

     Key Components

     Defining demographic indicators - Indicators are the measures describing a community’s health
     that are related to desired health outcomes; they should allow for identification of health
     inequities by geography, age, race/ethnicity and socioeconomic status when feasible. Before
     gathering data, identify meaningful indicators of health and health determinants.
Detecting disparities - Aggregate data about a population can obscure subpopulation
differences. Electronic health record (EHR) data may be useful for tracking and stratifying
health status by race, ethnicity and language, as well as other sociodemographic characteristics
(e.g., income, disability or veteran status, sexual orientation and gender).

Reaching populations facing inequities - Some segments of a population—such as individuals
who lack a stable address or who do not speak English—may not be represented in existing data.
Make a specific effort to engage individuals from those populations. Consider where these
individuals congregate and conduct targeted outreach in these locations.

Apply research principles to the CHA process

CHA will include a combination of primary data collected and secondary data that comes from
other sources, such as the local health department. With both primary and secondary sources,
there are two main types of data:

Quantitative: numerical population data that can establish a benchmark for health indicators
and conditions.

Qualitative: descriptive data based on opinions and perceptions that can illustrate how people
think or feel; typically gathered from interviews, focus groups, photovoice, participatory action
research or town hall meetings.

Community-based participatory research (CBPR) methodology is particularly applicable to the
CHA process. It is a collaborative approach to research that equitably involves all partners in
the research process, recognizing the unique strengths that each partner brings and facilitating
collaborative partnership through the research. CBPR principles align well with the CHA
process.

Table 1: Community-based participatory research (CBPR) methodology
 CBPR Principles                               Relation to CHA Process

 Recognizes community as a unit of identity         The unit of analysis for CHAs is the
                                                    geographic community.
 Facilitates collaborative partnerships in all     CHA developers can foster long-term,
 phases of the research                            collaborative partnerships with community
                                                   members and stakeholders throughout the
                                                   process.
 Integrates knowledge and action for the           The hospital gains a more nuanced
 mutual benefit of all partners                    perspective of community health issues.
 Promotes a co-learning and empowering             Engaging the community throughout the
 process that attends to social inequalities       CHA process promotes a sense of joint
                                                   ownership and equity between the hospital
                                                   and community.
 Involves a cyclical and iterative process         The CHA process is an ongoing cycle that
                                                   should include periodic reflection and
                                                   course correction.
 Addresses health from         positive      and   CHA developers are encouraged to target the
 ecological perspectives                           social determinants of health in the
                                                   community in order to address the upstream
                                                   factors affecting health.
 Disseminates findings      and    knowledge       CHA results are publicly available and
 gained to all partners                            widely      distributed   to   participants,
                                                   stakeholders and the community at large.



Develop a data strategy

When planning the data collection process, the CHA advisory committee can discuss the
following considerations:

Is this the hospital’s first CHA or an update from previously published CHAs?

Will the collected data be new, updated from existing data or both?

What requirements need to be fulfilled?

Is the hospital operating alone or with other partners?

Is the CHA representing one community, one hospital or multiple jurisdictions?

Will you be conducting the CHA in partnership with local health departments or other hospitals?
Is there a system in place to store and manage CHA data?

Does the hospital require additional support to compile, assess and publish the data?

What level of geographic granularity is needed to identify disparities and unmet needs?

The hospital can call on both internal and community resources to advise on data collection and
provide data. This can include:

Hospital staff

Public health departments

Local colleges/universities

Research organizations

Community volunteers

Consulting firms

Public health institutes

Decide what data to include

Comprehensive CHAs include a thorough review of the statistics regarding a range of population
health indicators. Data collected and analyzed should reflect the clinical and non-clinical factors
that impact health. Guidelines for key metrics can be found in the County Health Rankings &
Roadmaps Model:
Figure 1: County Health Rankings & Roadmaps Model

Source: University of Wisconsin Population Health Institute. (2016). County Health Rankings
& Roadmaps: Our approach. Accessed at https://www.countyhealthrankings.org/explore-
health-rankings/measures-data-sources/county-health-rankings-model

Collect secondary quantitative data

Demographic and health data are compiled by local and state health departments as well as by
national sources such as County Health Rankings & Roadmaps, Community Commons and the
Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Selection of data sources will depend in part
on the definition of your hospital’s geographic service area. Local health department
epidemiologists can assist with ensuring data quality and validity. Input from local community
and neighborhood groups on access to health care, social determinants of health and other health
conditions can also enhance the quality of data collected, as it is coming directly from the
community.

National data sets can help you identify disparities at the local level.

Access electronic health record data

Electronic Health Record (EHR) data can provide a unique window into the health needs of
community members who have received care. Accessing the aggregate EHR data will require
working with the IT department to see what data they can pull from the data warehouse.
Considerations include:

Benchmarking patient data against the health indicators in the hospital’s service area

Aligning key indicators for the CHA with the fields being collected in the EHR

Linking patient records across the continuum of care

Tracking emergency department use

Documenting behavioral health issues and comorbidities with other chronic diseases in the EHR

Collect community-engaged primary data

Information not available in existing databases should be collected directly from your
community. This is an ideal opportunity to engage your community. There are four main
approaches to obtaining primary data:

Community surveys: written surveys distributed widely to the community on paper and/or
online
Key stakeholder interviews: one-on-one conversations between trained facilitators and
community stakeholders

Focus groups: group-based conversations of 5 to 10 participants led by a trained facilitator

Town hall meetings: community-wide meetings led by a trained facilitator

Guiding principles to consider when soliciting the opinions of community members about their
community health needs include:

Involve community members in developing surveys or interview guides to ensure that questions
are culturally appropriate, are understandable and will elicit desired responses. Do not use health
care jargon, as most people outside of the field will not understand it.

When developing questions, make sure the questions accurately and directly address what is
being measured.

Keep the wording of questions simple, with clearly defined terms. Avoid leading questions, two-
part questions or questions that make assumptions about the respondent.

Test the questions on a small sample of potential respondents so they can give feedback and
identify any confusing terms or suggest modifications.

Keep surveys short to reduce the time burden on the respondents and increase the response rate.
Include only relevant, necessary questions.

Collect responses from a large and diverse group of individuals who are representative of the
community served. If there is a significant non-English-speaking population, consider
approaches that would allow those individuals to participate in their native language.

Train individuals who will be conducting interviews and focus groups to perform this work
consistently and neutrally so as not to influence responses.

Develop standard processes for analyzing data. This is particularly important when coding
qualitative data, as it is a fairly subjective process.
Below are some suggested practices for engaging community members in the data collection
process:

Table 2: Community Surveys
 Community Surveys
 Content      and
 format            Assure respondents of confidentiality.
                   Collect race, ethnicity and language data in a culturally appropriate
                   manner.
                   Ensure that survey questions are culturally appropriate and at a literacy
                   level and language that respondents can understand.
                   Review the survey draft with community members to see what needs to
                   be modified.
                   Provide versions of the survey in the languages spoken by community
                   members.
                   Consider using or modifying a validated survey instrument or questions.
                   Assess regularity of health care usage as frequent users may have a
                   unique perspective.
                   Allow space for qualitative answers.
                   Provide the option for respondents to be contacted for further
                   involvement in the CHA process.
                   Distribute the survey online, on paper or both. Consider using both
                   methods if there are major segments of the community’s population
                   who do not have internet access.
                   Consider oversampling vulnerable populations since interventions
 Participants      would likely need to be focused on the needs of those groups.
                   Distribute the survey where people live, work, learn and play—at
                   churches, local businesses, health fairs, etc.
                   Widely advertise the survey using social media, newspaper
                   advertisements, etc.
                   Engage community leaders to encourage participation in the survey
                   among their constituents.
                   Consider specifically surveying the patient population.




Table 3: Key Stakeholder Interviews
 Key Stakeholder Interviews
Participants   Consider whom to interview:

               Interview stakeholders from a variety of sectors in the community.

               Engage clinicians—including physicians, nurses, community health
               workers, etc.—for interviews as they likely have insights into the health
               needs of patients in the hospital.

               Interview individuals representative of the community, including
               subgroups experiencing health disparities.

               Supplement topic areas with sparse secondary data by interviewing
               community stakeholders knowledgeable in that area.

               Find innovative ways to recruit for stakeholder interviews:

               Ask community leaders if they know and could provide connections to
               potential participants with the characteristics being targeted.
               Engage clinicians in hospitals or any associated medical groups and
               practices to identify patients for interviews.
               Talk to hospitals’ patient and family advisory councils (PFACs).
               Make the location easily accessible; consider factors such as proximity
               to public transportation, time of day, availability of parking, child care,
Location       etc.
               Hold the interviews in a neutral space (i.e., not the hospital).
               Consider online or phone interviews to reduce barriers to participation.
               Ensure that the interview facilitator is culturally competent and speaks
Facilitator    the language(s) spoken by the interviewees.
               Use a facilitator who is well trained in moderating interviews, including
               keeping participants on topic and maintaining a neutral position.
Developing     Develop an interview guide so the same questions are asked across all
interview      interviews.
               Ask short and open-ended questions to encourage dialogue on various
questions      topics.
               Review the list of questions ahead of time with community members to
               ensure that questions are culturally appropriate and at a level that
               participants would be able to understand.
               Be aware that the interview facilitator cannot ask people to identify their
               health conditions.
                      If possible, provide the questions to attendees ahead of time.
 Conducting the
 interviews           Explain to participants how their input will be used.
                      Establish confidentiality of the participants’ responses. Especially in
                      small communities, participants may be worried about their names
                      being attached to their comments.
                      Provide an estimated timeline of when final results will be shared.
                      Ask whether the individual would like to be involved in future stages of
                      the CHA and set the process for continued engagement.
                      Establish realistic expectations for what the hospital and partners can do
                      to address community needs.




Table 4: Focus Groups
 Focus Groups
                     Consider whom to sample: a cross-section of the whole community
 Participants        and/or more targeted groups?
                     Contemplate recruiting from existing groups (e.g., PFACs, church
                     groups).
                     Find innovative ways to recruit for focus groups where people live,
                     learn, work and play (e.g., advertisements on social media, in
                     newspapers, on the radio, at churches, local businesses, etc.).
                     Engage clinicians to identify patients for focus groups.
                     Consider members of the community who may not be easily reached
                     and brainstorm how they can be recruited.
                     Encourage attendance through reminder notices.
                     Limit focus groups to 10 or fewer participants to ensure that everyone’s
                     opinions can be heard.
                     Make the location easily accessible for community members. Consider
                     factors such as proximity to public transportation, time of day,
 Location            availability of parking, child care, etc.
                     Hold the focus groups in a neutral space (i.e., not the hospital).
                     Consider holding virtual or phone focus groups to reduce barriers to
                     participation.
                     Focus groups should typically last no longer than 90 minutes.
                     Use a facilitator who is well trained in moderating focus groups,
                     including keeping participants on topic, maintaining a neutral position,
 Facilitator         and making sure that everyone participates and is listened to.
                     Ensure the facilitator is culturally competent and speaks the language(s)
                     spoken by attendees.
                     Consider using a facilitator from a neutral third party, so participants
                     feel more comfortable.
 Developing          Develop a focus group question guide, so the same questions are asked
 focus               across multiple focus groups.
                     Ask short and open-ended questions to encourage dialogue on various
 group questions     topics.
                     Review the list of questions ahead of time with community members to
                     ensure that questions are culturally appropriate and at a level that
                     participants would be able to understand.
                     If possible, provide the questions to attendees ahead of time.
                     Refrain from asking very sensitive questions that individuals would not
                     want to share in a group.
                     Establish confidentiality of the participants’ responses. Especially in
                     small communities, participants can be concerned about their names
 Conducting the      being attached to their comments.
 focus groups        Explain to participants how their input will be used.
                     Give participants an estimated timeline of when results will be shared.
                     Establish realistic expectations for what the hospital and partners can do
                     to address community needs.
                     Ask whether the individual would like to be involved in future stages of
                     the CHA and set the process for continued engagement.




Table 5: Town Hall Meetings
 Town Hall Meetings
                    Advertise the meetings where people live, work, learn and play using
                    social media, newspapers, radio, announcements and flyers, local
 Participants       organizations, support groups, PFACs, etc.
                    If possible, offer child care for participants.
                    Explain why the CHA is relevant for the whole community.
                    Make the location easily accessible for community members. Consider
                    factors such as proximity to public transportation, time of day,
 Location           availability of parking, child care, etc.
                    Hold the meetings in a neutral space (i.e., not the hospital).
                      Consider coordinating the meeting with existing community or town
                      meetings.
 Finding          a   Ensure that the facilitator is culturally competent, speaks the languages
 facilitator          spoken by community members and is sensitive to attendees’ needs.
                      The facilitator should be well trained in moderating community
                      meetings, including keeping participants on topic, ensuring that louder
                      voices do not drown out others, and maintaining a neutral position.
 Developing      an   Develop a draft agenda and questions and, if possible, distribute them to
 agenda               attendees ahead of time.
                      Ask participants open-ended questions to encourage dialogue about
 and questions        various topics.
                      Review the list of questions ahead of time with community members to
                      ensure that questions are culturally appropriate and at a level that
                      participants would be able to understand.
 Meeting              Tell all participants how their feedback will be used and when results
 logistics            will be shared.
                      Consider using voting devices (clickers, cell phone apps, etc.) to gain
                      input from more community members, especially those who may not
                      feel comfortable speaking up in a public setting.
                      Establish realistic expectations for what the hospital and partners can do
                      to address community needs.
                      Provide the option for participants to be contacted for further
                      involvement in the CHA process; this is an easy way to identify
                      individuals who desire increased engagement.

Assessing health needs of a patient

Health Needs Assessment

A health needs assessment (HNA) is a systematic method of identifying unmet health and health
care needs of a population and making changes to meet those unmet needs. Health needs
assessments are used to improve health, commissioning of healthcare and other service
planning, policy making and priority setting - like in a Joint Strategic Needs Assessment (JSNA)
that local authorities and CCGs have to produce.
Health needs assessments lead to agreed priorities and resource allocation that will improve
health, planning of services and address health inequalities. They also encourage partnership
work and innovation and enable the target population to contribute.

Heath needs assessments are the back bone of public health work so it is important to know how
to conduct them. There are a number of ways to conduct a HNA including compartive and
corporative but the most common approach is called 'epidemiologically based' where you
combine epidemiology with cost effectiveness and effectiveness of interventions. It is worth
noting that the aim of a HNA is to aid decision making and to promote action so it is important
that the emphasis is on what actions you are reccommended. As a result, many public health
teams have moved away from producing a book of work that sits on a shelf to powerpoint
presentations or factsheets. This helps them to influence decision makers and get public health
action done. The following is my distilled version of a HNA. Remember to add an executive
summary and that a lot of decision makers are really busy so keep your HNA brief and to the
point with your recommendations jumping out of the page.

Sections of a Health Needs Assessment

State your aim - why are you doing the HNA?

Define the problem to be addressed in a defined population (and any sub-categories of the
problem)

Describe the size and nature of the problem - this is your epidemiology section covering who's
affected, risk factors, health equalities etc.

Describe the current services available to address this problem

Synthesize and summarize the evidence from the literature on the interventions available
(Literature review).

Summarize your findings from stakeholders - what are the viewpoints of the health
professionals and others involved in providing services or interventions on this issue? (Usually
this is in the form of a stakeholders workshop).
Summarize your findings from users/patients - what do patients want and need? (This can be
from focus groups).

Summarize cost-effective solutions and resource implications (economic appraisal)

Recommendations for action

Identify the indicators and outcomes needed to evaluate change.

Further                Reading:             https://www.k4health.org/sites/default/files/migra...,
http://www.bmj.com/specialties/health-needs-assess...

Most doctors are used to assessing the health needs of their individual patients. Through
professional training and clinical experience a systematic approach to this assessment has been
developed and for use before start of treatment that is believed to be effective. Such a systematic
approach has often been missing when it comes to assessing the health needs of a local or
practice population.

The health needs of individual patients coming through the consulting room door may not reflect
the wider health needs of the community. If people have a health problem that they believe
cannot be helped by the health service, then they will not attend. For example, many people with
angina or multiple sclerosis are not known to either their local general practitioner or to a
hospital specialist. Other groups of patients who may need health care but do not demand it
include homeless people and people with chronic mental illness.

Distinguishing between individual needs and the wider needs of the community is important in
the planning and provision of local health services. If these needs are ignored then there is a
danger of a top-down approach to providing health services, which relies too heavily on what a
few people perceive to be the needs of the population rather than what they actually are.

Summary points

Health needs assessment is the systematic approach to ensuring that the health service uses its
resources to improve the health of the population in the most efficient way
It involves epidemiological, qualitative, and comparative methods to describe health problems
of a population; identify inequalities in health and access to services; and determine priorities
for the most effective use of resources

Health needs are those that can benefit from health care or from wider social and environmental
changes

Successful health needs assessments require a practical understanding of what is involved, the
time and resources necessary to undertake assessments, and sufficient integration of the results
into planning and commissioning of local services

Importance of needs assessment

The costs of health care are rising. Over the past 30 years expenditure on health care has risen
much faster than the cost increases reported in other sectors of the economy, and health care is
now one of the largest sectors in most developed countries. Medical advances and demographic
changes will continue the upward pressure on costs.

At the same time the resources available for health care are limited. Many people have
inequitable access to adequate health care, and many governments are unable to provide such
care universally. In addition there is a large variation in availability and use of health care by
geographical area and point of provision. Availability tends to be inversely related to the need
of the population served.

Another force for change is consumerism. The expectations of members of the public have led
to greater concerns about the quality of the services they receive—from access and equity to
appropriateness and effectiveness.

These factors have triggered reforms of health services in both developed and developing
countries. In Britain these reforms resulted in the separation of the responsibility for financing
health care from its provision and in the establishment of a purchasing role for health authorities
and general practitioners. Health authorities had greater opportunities to try to tailor local
services to their own populations, and the 1990 National Health Service Act required health
authorities to assess health needs of their populations and to use these assessments to set
priorities to improve the health of their local population. This has been reinforced by more recent
work on inequalities in health, suggesting that health authorities should undertake “equity
audits” to determine if healthcare resources are being used in accordance with need.

At a primary care level, through fundholding, locality commissioning, and total purchasing
projects, general practitioners have become more central to strategic planning and development
of health services. With this increased commissioning power has come the increased expectation
from patients and politicians that decision making would reflect local and national priorities,
promoting effective and equitable care on the basis of need. The Labour government has
committed itself to ensuring access to treatment according to “need and need alone,” and the
key functions of primary care groups will be to plan, commission, and monitor local health
services to meet identified local needs.

Needs

Doctors, sociologists, philosophers, and economists all have different views of what needs are.
In recognition of the scarcity of resources available to meet these needs, health needs are often
differentiated as needs, demands, and supply as shown in Figure 2.
Figure 2: Health needs

Different aspects of needs

Need in health care is commonly defined as the capacity to benefit. If health needs are to be
identified then an effective intervention should be available to meet these needs and improve
health. There will be no benefit from an intervention that is not effective or if there are no
resources available.

Demand is what patients ask for; it is the needs that most doctors encounter. General
practitioners have a key role as gatekeepers in controlling this demand, and waiting lists become
a surrogate marker and an influence on this demand. Demand from patients for a service can
depend on the characteristics of the patient or on the media’s interest in the service. Demand
can also be induced by supply: geographical variation in hospital admission rates is explained
more by the supply of hospital beds than by indicators of mortality; referral rates of general
practitioners owe more to the characteristics of individual doctors than to the health of their
populations.

Supply is the health care provided. This will depend on the interests of health professionals, the
priorities of politicians, and the amount of money available. National health technology
assessment programmes have developed in recognition of the importance of assessing the supply
of new services and treatments before their widespread introduction.

Need, demand, and supply overlap, and this relation is important to consider when assessing
health needs as shown in Figure 3.




Figure 3: Relation between need, supply, and demand—central area shows ideal relation.
Modified from Stevens and Raferty.

Health needs incorporate the wider social and environmental determinants of health, such as
deprivation, housing, diet, education, employment. This wider definition allows us to look
beyond the confines of the medical model based on health services, to the wider influences on
health (box). Health needs of a population will be constantly changing, and many will not be
amenable to medical intervention.

For individual practices and health professionals, health needs assessment provides the
opportunity for:
Describing the patterns of disease in the local population and the differences from district,
regional, or national disease patterns;

Learning more about the needs and priorities of their patients and the local population;

Highlighting the areas of unmet need and providing a clear set of objectives to work towards to
meet these needs;

Deciding rationally how to use resources to improve their local population’s health in the most
effective and efficient way;

Influencing policy, interagency collaboration, or research and development priorities.

1.4.3 Communication skills in health education and promotion

Communication is an essential part of human life; all meaningful social interaction can be
labelled ‘communication’. Without communication an individual could never become a fully
functioning human being. Reading, writing, listening, speaking, viewing and creating images
are all acts of communication. There are also many more subtle communication activities that
may be conscious or unconscious. These include expression, gesture and ‘body language’.
Through communication people transfer facts, ideas, emotions, knowledge, attitudes and skills
to make informed decisions about their health. In this study session you will learn the basic
concepts, levels, roles, principles and types of communication used in health education and
health promotion.

Concepts of communication

Different writers define communication in different ways although the central concept remains
the same. The word communication is derived from the Latin word ‘communis’ which means
to form a common ground of understanding, to share information, ideas or attitudes and to impart
or transmit information. The common feature of these definitions is the transmission or
exchange of information. Communication implies the sharing of meaning among those who are
communicating. To engage in communication is therefore to engage in the process by which
  two or more people exchange ideas, facts, feelings or impressions, so that each gains a common
  or mutual understanding of the meaning and use of a message.

  Health communication

  Health communication is the art and technique of informing, influencing and motivating
  individuals or larger audiences about important health issues based on scientific and ethical
  considerations. It includes the study and use of communication strategies to inform and
  influence individual and community decisions that enhance health. Health communication is
  recognised as a necessary part of efforts to improve personal and public health. In other words,
  health communication encompasses the study and use of communication strategies to inform
  and influence individual and community knowledge, attitudes and practices (KAP) with regard
  to health and healthcare.

Health communication:

      initiates action
      makes needs known
      exchanges knowledge, attitudes and practices
      helps people understand issues and may change their health beliefs
      establishes and maintains relationships with health providers.




  Objectives of health communication

  In any type of communication, whether you are writing or speaking, trying to persuade, inform
  or educate, there are several general objectives. These include being understood, being accepted,
  and influencing an action such as a change of behaviour.

  Health communication contributes to better health outcomes for individuals and for the whole
  community. It raises awareness of health risks and solutions, and provides the motivation and
  skills needed to reduce these risks. It can affect or reinforce good health practices and attitudes,
  giving people the information they need to make complex choices, such as selecting health
plans, care providers and treatments. Health communication also encourages social norms that
benefit health and improve quality of life.

Health communication is useful in helping individuals to find support from other people in
similar situations. Most importantly health communication can increase appropriate demand for
and use of health services. For the community, health communication can be used to influence
the public agenda, advocate for policies and programmes, and promote positive change. At the
same time it can help improve the delivery of public health and healthcare services.

Health communication can be both complex and subtle and different people may focus on
different areas. For example one person might generate action through helping people to
understand health-related issues, and another by helping them express their needs. Both of these
roles will help people to think that bringing about change is a good idea.

The role of health communication in health education and promotion

    Increases knowledge and awareness of a health issue, problem, or its solution
    Influences perceptions, beliefs, attitudes and social norms about health
    Generates effective action
    Demonstrates or illustrates health related skills
    Shows the benefit of behaviour change
    Increases appropriate use and demand for health services
    Reinforces knowledge, attitudes and behaviour
    Refutes myths and misconceptions
    Advocates for a health issue or a population group.

Levels of health communication

The more levels a communication programme can influence, the greater the likelihood of
creating and sustaining the desired change. This section outlines the different levels at which
health communication can take place.

Individuals
The individual is the most fundamental target for health-related change, since it is individual
behaviours that affect health status. Communication can affect an individual’s awareness,
knowledge, attitudes, self-efficacy, and skills for behaviour change. For example, counselling
on sexual risk reduction as well as HIV testing is an effective way to change behaviour and
protect health.

Social networks

An individual’s relationships and the groups (including family), to which they belong can have
a significant impact on his or her health. Health communication programmes can work to shape
the information a group receives and may attempt to change communication patterns within the
group. Opinion leaders within a network are often a point of entry for health programmes such
as family-based HIV counselling and testing, or peer education. Targeting health
communication at social networks may result in a diffusion of innovations and network-based
health strategies. It can also provide opportunities for voluntary counselling and health tests for
all network members.

Organisations

Organisations include formal groups with a defined structure such as associations, clubs,
worksites or schools. Organisations can disseminate health messages to their members, provide
support for individuals and make policy changes that enable individual change. Examples
include institution-based health programmes providing services such as voluntary counselling
and health testing, or antenatal and child health services. These are often available within
workplaces, schools and other institutional settings.

Communities

The collective wellbeing of communities can be fostered by creating structures and policies that
support healthy lifestyles and reduce or eliminate hazards in social and physical environments.
Community-level initiatives are planned and led by organisations and institutions that can
influence health such as schools, worksites, healthcare settings, community groups and
government agencies.

Society

Society as a whole has many influences on individual and community behaviour, including
norms and values, attitudes and opinions, and laws and policies. Society also creates a physical,
economic and cultural environment.

Communicating at the society level can include using the mass media and other types of social
mobilisation. For example, HIV or TB educational programmes can be achieved through school,
church and workplace education programmes.

Types of communication

One-way communication

If the flow of information from the sender to the receiver is one-way the communication is
dominated by the sender’s knowledge and information is poured out towards the receiver. This
model does not consider feedback and interaction with the sender. A familiar example of this
model is the lecture method used in a classroom, where the teacher stands at the front of the
class and lectures on a subject without any interaction or activities. Unless mechanisms are put
in place to get feedback from the audience, many mass media communication methods are one-
way.




Figure 4: One-way communication.
One-way communication isn’t in itself wrong and there times when it is very useful — as Table
6 illustrates. Think of a situation when one-way communication is used effectively.

Table 6: Advantages and disadvantages of one-way communication

 Advantages                            Disadvantages
 ● Faster                              ● Little audience participation
 ● Orderly                             ● No feedback
 ● Learning of facts is                ● Does not influence
 authoritative                         behaviour




Two-way communication

In this model the information flows from the sender to the receiver and back from receiver to
the sender again in the other direction. Two-way communication is reciprocal, the communicant
(receiver) becomes the communicator (sender) and the communicator (sender) in turn becomes
a communicant (receiver). Most ordinary conversations are along the lines of this model (Figure
5). Two-way communication is usually more appropriate for problem-solving situations.




Figure 5: Two-way communication




Table 7: Advantages and disadvantages of two-way communication.

 Advantages                            Disadvantages
 ● More audience participation         ● Slower, takes more time
 ● Learning is more democratic
 ● Open to feedback
 ● May influence behaviour
 change




Key terms for two-way communication

  Sender: the originator of each message — this could be an individual, group or
     organisation.
  Message: the idea being communicated.
  Channel: the means by which a message travels from sender to receiver.
  Receiver: the person for whom the communication is intended.
  Effect: the change in the receiver’s knowledge, attitude or practice.
  Feedback: telling what they have done well or how to improve. Two-way feedback
     means that members of the community can tell you what you communicated well and
     what didn’t work so well.




Health Communication

It is defined as the study and use of communication strategies to inform and influence individual
and community decisions that enhance health.

Health communication includes verbal and written strategies to influence and empower
individuals, populations, and communities to make healthier choices. Health communication
often integrates components of multiple theories and models to promote positive changes in
attitudes and behaviors. Health communication is related to social marketing, which involves
the development of activities and interventions designed to positively change behaviors.

Effective health communication and social marketing strategies include the following
components:
    Use of research-based strategies to shape materials and products and to select the
     channels that deliver them to the intended audience.
    Understanding of conventional wisdom, concepts, language, and priorities for different
     cultures and settings.
    Consideration of health literacy, internet access, media exposure, and cultural
     competency of target populations.
    Development of materials such as brochures, billboards, newspaper articles, television
     broadcasts, radio commercials, public service announcements, newsletters, pamphlets,
     videos, digital tools, case studies, group discussions, health fairs, field trips, and
     workbooks among others media outlets.

Using a variety of communication channels can allow health messages to shape mass media or
interpersonal, small group, or community level campaigns. Health communication strategies
aim to change people's knowledge, attitudes, and/or behaviors; for example:

    Increase risk perception
    Reinforce positive behaviors
    Influence social norms
    Increase availability of support and needed services
    Empower individuals to change or improve their health conditions

Examples of media strategies to convey health messages include the following components:

    Radio
    Television
    Newspaper
    Flyers
    Brochures
    Internet
    Social media tools (i.e., Twitter, Facebook, and YouTube)

Communication methods
Communication of health information is most effective when a variety of methods, approaches
and materials are used. Broadly speaking, there are three main approaches:

Person-to-person contact

Captive audiences may be found at clinics, feeding centres, food-distribution centres, water-
collection points and so on, where health workers and trained volunteers will be able to give
advice. In nonemergency periods, health clinics, schools and workplaces may provide similar
audiences. Meetings may be called for specific groups, or selected individuals may be brought
together for focus group discussions on specific topics, and individual families may also be
visited. The influence of existing local groups or social organizations can be very useful in
increasing the impact of the information.

This direct approach, particularly if it involves some interaction between health workers and
individuals, is most effective in tackling specific issues and encouraging particular changes in
behaviour, and in checking that messages are seen as relevant and useful by the people
concerned.

Activities suitable for person-to-person exchanges or for small groups include the discussion of
personal feelings and experiences, demonstrations, story-telling, role-playing, case studies and
educational games (particularly in nonemergency situations).

Teaching aids

Suitable teaching aids include printed materials, posters, films, slides, videos, murals, flannel
graphs and flip charts. These are useful for transmitting information and as support to the spoken
word, but must be reinforced by interaction and personal contact with members of the target
audience.

Using mass communication

Radio, audiocassettes, television, video, newspapers, placards, plays, puppet shows and
megaphones are effective means of communicating information quickly to a large number of
people and creating awareness of a problem or idea. The relevance and impact of messages, and
the effectiveness with which they are communicated, need to be evaluated by discussion with a
sample of people.

Following a disaster, mass media may be unavailable or at least severely disrupted. However,
radios may be available, and in long-term emergency settlements it may be possible to produce
a camp newspaper and to make arrangements with a nearby radio station to broadcast regular
programmes on health issues.

Further reading: https://www.ruralhealthinfo.org/toolkits/health-promotion/2/strategies/health-
communication

Health Education

Health education is one strategy for implementing health promotion and disease prevention
programs. Health education provides learning experiences on health topics. Health education
strategies are tailored for their target population. Health education presents information to target
populations on particular health topics, including the health benefits/threats they face, and
provides tools to build capacity and support behavior change in an appropriate setting.

Examples of health education activities include:

    Lectures
    Courses
    Seminars
    Webinars
    Workshops
    Classes

Characteristics of health education strategies include:

    Participation of the target population.
    Completion of a community needs assessment to identify community capacity, resources,
     priorities, and needs.
    Planned learning activities that increase participants' knowledge and skills.
    Implementation of programs with integrated, well-planned curricula and materials that
     take place in a setting convenient for participants.
    Presentation of information with audiovisual and computer based supports such as slides
     and projectors, videos, books, CDs, posters, pictures, websites, or software programs.
    Ensuring proficiency of program staff, through training, to maintain fidelity to the
     program model.(https://www.ruralhealthinfo.org/toolkits/health-
     promotion/2/strategies/health-education)

Health Promotion

Health promotion is the process of improving and protecting the health of the public, including
individuals, populations, and communities. Health promotion can be achieved through planned
activities and programs that are designed to improve population health outcomes. Health
promotion programs can empower individuals to make healthier choices and reduce their risk
of disease and disability. At the population level, they can eliminate health disparities, improve
quality of life, and improve the availability of healthcare and related services.

Health promotion programs can be implemented in varied settings, including rural communities.
Rural residents can benefit from health promotion and disease prevention programs scaled for
use in rural communities, which have unique implementation considerations.

Recording and Presentation assessment reports

Contents of an assessment report

In order to be as relevant as possible, the assessment report should contain the following
elements:

The aim of the assessment

The candidate’s professional experience

The results of the assessment test
  The explanation of the test’s results that has been delivered by the candidate

  The candidate’s possible disagreement with this or that part of the test results or interpretation

  The possible development actions in relation to the candidate’s (present of future) professional
  occupation




Learning Activities

Practical activity

  Shellemiah is a Health Extension Practitioner in the village of Kisumu. He planned to teach his
  community about environmental sanitation and the benefits of latrine construction. Note down
  which forms of health communication a Health Extension Practitioner like he might want to use
  to teach the community about the issue of building and using latrines.

  Self-Assessment Questions

  One of the services that Health Extension Practitioners are currently delivering is about
  HIV/AIDS and TB. Health communication is vital for delivering this service effectively. If you
  were conducting a health education programme on HIV/AIDS for young people, list the
  communication objectives you would want to achieve and justify.

  Discuss some of the differences between one-way communication and two-way communication.

  Give some examples of how health communication can help a. individuals, and b. communities.

  Answers to Self-Assessment questions

  One of the services that Health Extension Practitioners are currently delivering is about
  HIV/AIDS and TB. Health communication is vital for delivering this service effectively. If you
  were conducting a health education programme on HIV/AIDS for young people, list the
  communication objectives you would want to achieve and justify.
To create understanding on HIV/AIDS in the minds of young people

To help young people so that they can accept the message delivered

To get the young people to act on the required behaviour

Justification:

In any type of communication, whether you are writing or speaking, trying to persuade, inform,
explain, convince or educate the general objectives would be first to create an understanding of
HIV/AIDS in the minds of young people, second help them to accept the message delivered,
and finally to influence the young people to change their behaviour.

Discuss some of the differences between one-way communication and two-way communication.

In one-way communication the flow of information is from the sender to the receiver. The
communication is dominated by the sender’s knowledge and learning is authoritative. This
model does not consider feedback and interaction with the sender.

During two-way communication information flows from the sender to the receiver and back
again. This model is reciprocal and roles are interchanged. Two-way communication is more
appropriate in problem-solving situations and there is more participation and feedback, learning
is democratic and it can more easily influence behaviour change. However, this type of
communication takes more time.

Give some examples of how health communication can help a. individuals, and b. communities.

For individuals, health communication:

Contributes to better health outcomes

Raises awareness of health risks and solutions

Provides the motivation and skills needed to reduce these risks
Affects or reinforces good health practices and attitudes, and gives people the information they
need to make complex choices, such as selecting health plans, care providers and treatments

Helps individuals to find support from other people in similar situations.

For the community, health communication:

Encourages social norms that benefit health and improve quality of life

Can increase appropriate demand for and appropriate use of health services

Can be used to influence the public agenda, advocate for policies and programmes and promote
positive changes in socio-economic and physical environments

Can help improve the delivery of public health and healthcare services.

1.6 Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials

The following resources are provided:
 Teaching charts                Sound system                    Weighing scales/materials

 Stationery                       Recording                     Cleaning materials
                                  materials/computers
 Computer – internet,                                           Bronchures
                                  VCD/DVDs               -
 Pamphlets                        audio,videos                  Models

 Posters /flip-charts




References

Hartwig, K., Calleson, D., and Williams, M. (2006). Unit 1, section 1.1: Definitions, rationale
and key principles in CBPR. In Developing and sustaining community-based participatory
research      partnerships:      A      skill-building       curriculum.     Retrieved      from
https://depts.washington.edu/ccph/cbpr/u1/u11.php
Health Research & Educational Trust. (2016, July). Applying research principles to the
community health needs assessment process. Chicago, IL: Health Research & Educational
Trust.        Accessed   at   https://www.aha.org/ahahret-guides/2016-07-15-applying-research-
principles-community-health-needs-assessment-process




     Learning Outcomes 2: Develop objectives for health education and promotion

   Introduction to the learning outcome

   This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to conduct dietary
   surveys. It comprises principles of health promotion, developing objectives of health
   promotion/education, learning activities, self-assessment questions and answers,
   learning activities, tools, equipment, supplies and materials and references.

   Performance Standard

         I.    Broad objective is drawn and documented as per WHO standards and work
               place policy
     II.       Specific objectives are drawn and documented as per WHO standards and work
               place policy



   Information Sheet

   Principles of health promotion

   The Five Principles

   A Broad and Positive Health Concept:

   Health should be considered broadly and not merely as the direct opposite of disease and
   death. It should also Embrace Dimensions of a Good Life and The Significance of Social
   Relations.
Underlying this principle is the fundamental assumption that humans exist within, and
are influenced by, their cultural, economic and social contexts. Contemporary health
problems are therefore embedded in the societal structures that surround us. This means
that lifestyle and its health-related consequences cannot be treated independently of
living conditions, and that a given intervention must be directed towards both lifestyle
and living conditions.

Conceptualization of the “positive” stems from the World Health Organization‘s (WHO)
well-recognized definition of health from 1947: “Health is a state of complete physical,
social and mental wellbeing, and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity.” This
definition uses the concept of wellbeing to indicate the positive aspects of health. It is
important to note, however, that WHO’s positive definition still includes absence of
disease as one of the dimensions of health. The positive definition is, in other words,
more extensive than the negative, which merely focuses on absence of diseases while
still emphasizing the importance of avoiding illness.
Figure 6: Four different health concepts.

Figure 6 summarizes the definition of “positive” and “broad”, with the horizontal axis
representing the difference between positive and negative and the vertical axis
representing broad vs. narrow. The two concepts can be combined in four different ways,
and the figure therefore illustrates four different possible health concepts. The SHPR
approach strives for the health concept in square 4.

For example, a “positive” definition of health is applied in relation to food and meals
when both the aesthetic and nutritional aspects are addressed. Working with a “broad”
concept may include the availability of healthy food in the canteen, its cost, etc., as
factors influencing attempts to motivate individuals to eat healthier.
The “positive” approach to the health concept relates to the target group’s everyday
language and concepts. The terms “food” and “meals” generate more interest and
engagement than do “nutrition” and “diet”. Similarly, “games”, “play” and “dance”
ensure greater motivation in the target groups than do “physical activity” and “exercise”.
Words and concepts are not neutral. They can exclude and demotivate, or they can
contribute to ownership and internalization. Thus, a broad and positive concept of health
is a determining element in attempts to engage and motivate the target group.




Participation and Involvement:

Participant involvement means ensuring the target group’s influence on projects and
interventions.

Participation and involvement is perhaps the most central of the health promotion
principles, in the sense that sustainable health promotion change can only take place if
the target group has the opportunity to develop ownership—and ownership and
internalization are more likely to be achieved if the target group is actively involved in
the processes from the start.

The notion of participation and involvement can imply many different things among
different groups of healthcare professionals. This principle highlights the fact that
development of ownership is not necessarily determined by those who take the initiative.
The interesting developments may well first occur in the subsequent process, which
leads to the point of decision-making. A situation in which the healthcare professional
initiates a process by proposing a range of options, which are then developed and
modified by the target group (e.g., patients), allows for greater involvement and
strengthened ownership and empowerment. The focus for developing ownership thus
shifts from “initiative” and “bottom-up” to “dialogue” and “co-creation”.

Hart notes that participation varies with individual characteristics and with context.
People have different kinds of motivation, capacity and potential for participation. It is
therefore important to maximise the opportunity for anyone to choose to participate at
the highest level of their ability.
There are often several stages involved in health-related projects. These stages further
allow for different forms of participation, and therefore a given health project often
covers many different forms of participation along the way. One question could be
whether participation is voluntary, and a second could relate to who takes an active lead
in developing visions, ideas and proposals for solutions.

A third question could focus on who should be involved in evaluating and, if necessary,
modifying the project for implementation in practice.

The principle of participation and involvement lies at the heart of diabetes prevention
and management, as it places the responsibility for facilitation on the healthcare
professional, whose task is to carry out an authentic dialogue with participants. During
the course of this dialogue, it is both the right and the duty of healthcare professionals to
contribute their professional knowledge, shape the dialogue and provide their own
opinions. The dialogue must, however, facilitate discussion about mutual expectations
and active participation in the decision-making process and ensure that it is mutually
respected by the participant and healthcare professional. This health promotion principle
thus signals a potential alternative pathway between top-down and bottom-up: dialogue
and shared decision-making.




Action and Action Competence:

Participants are given the opportunity to build skills to manage their own lives and
change the conditions and structures that influence their health.

In SHPR projects the concept of action competence is an overall goal. The concept
derives from an educational tradition based upon democracy, participation and a “hands-
on” approach. This stands in contrast to the more behavioral tradition, where the goal is
to shape individual behavior in a predetermined direction. A range of important health
promotion concepts and approaches incorporate, in one way or another, a resource-
oriented perspective on health issues. Attention has been directed towards, among other
things, the five components described below. Collectively, these components constitute
the elements necessary to achieve a high level of what we choose to call “action
competence”.
Insight: A broad, positive and action-oriented understanding of health, including insight
into effects, causes and change strategies within the health area.

Commitment: The desire and motivation to get involved in change processes with a view
to promoting health.

Vision: The ability to think creatively and have a vision, while allowing oneself to be
inspired by other scenarios.

Action experience: Experience of undertaking change processes at both individual and
collective levels, including tackling and overcoming any barriers.

Critical sense: The ability to critically question information before adopting and drawing
reasonable conclusions.

Action experience—i.e. direct experience with changing one’s own life or
surroundings— constitutes a core element of “action competence”. A health promotion
approach aimed at building up action competence should therefore allow target groups
to be involved with authentic issues and challenges in order to utilize the learning
potential found in real-life actions.

“Action competence” and “action” are inter-related, but should not be confused with
each other.

For example, a group of children may possess the ability to act (action competence) in
the context of “body and motion”, but they also require an opportunity to apply the
competence in order to achieve a health-related change. In other words, there should be
sufficient “room for action”, such that the developed “action competence” can unfold.
Accordingly, the healthcare professional should provide space and foster the target
group’s action competence. The concept of action competence is closely inter-linked
with a focus on settings and enables us to look at how living conditions influence the
ability to facilitate the components of action competence.
Figure 7: Four different categories of action.

Health Should be Viewed from a “Settings Perspective”:

The structural and contextual settings in which people live, work and reside influence
their opportunities for healthy living

Health education cannot stand alone. Our lives and practices are influenced by the
general contextual framework in which we live. The underlying aim of always applying
a settings perspective is that a given intervention should encompass educational
components as well as the surrounding contextual framework within which education
operates. Examples of frameworks that should be included in health promotion could
include environmental restructuring in different settings, e.g., the school classroom, the
preschool playground, the local community centre, the physical and aesthetic
environment of the clinic or the training rooms at a municipal prevention centre.

It is possible to differentiate between two different varieties of the setting concept: (1)
The immediate context within which teaching or interventions occur (e.g. school, clinic,
prevention centre or workplace) and (2) the context within which participants’ daily lives
unfold (e.g. home, local area or sport clubs).

Context, as applied in the first sense here concerns the physical, cultural and social
frameworks for conducting the intervention, whereas in the second sense it relates to the
framework of a daily life within which learning has to be applied. Here it is essential to
focus on how physical and social structural frameworks provide optimal synergy for
health promotion issues. For example, one could address how the immediate physical
environment should be restructured to allow greater opportunity and motivation to
encourage participants to share their experiences. For instance, does placing tables and
chairs in a certain way have an effect on participation and motivation? What
environmental conditions assist in creating a pleasant atmosphere that has a positive
influence on motivation? How should the physical surroundings be organized to provide
optimal desire to exercise among people attending a municipal prevention centre?

Equity in Health:

Not everyone has the same opportunities for leading healthy lives and changing
practices. Health promotion interventions must take these differences into account

This fifth principle, which aims to increase equity in health, is strictly speaking not a
methodological principle in the same sense as the four other principles. Rather, it is an
ideological perspective and a core value that all projects and all of the other four
principles should take into account.

There is no doubt that individuals from socially disadvantaged groups have a higher risk
of developing chronic conditions such as type 2 diabetes. It is also well known that
practically all methods used in diabetes management and prevention are less effective in
individuals who have access to fewer resources. In other words, there is a need to direct
our attention towards those who are most vulnerable and to try to understand how they
can be motivated and involved as effectively as other groups.

The fifth principle therefore focuses on developing and designing tailored methods and
approaches that fulfil the unmet needs of specific groups, such as residents in certain
socially disadvantaged areas, or vulnerable individuals with diabetes, e.g., from ethnic
minority groups or people with multi-morbidity. Moreover, this perspective also
encompasses a leading global challenge that demands immediate attention in areas of
the world suffering from major health-related social and financial burdens and, thus,
requires effective interventions for both prevention and patient education.

For diabetes prevention and management research, the setting approach provides a view
of life as it is actually lived, whether this relates to work, the family or the local
community. It also sharpens the focus on the complexity associated with health
promotion initiatives. Whilst other approaches to research seek to avoid or reduce the
complexity of daily lives by choice of more positivist study designs or analytical
methods, the setting approach welcomes complexity and seeks to actively handle it,
describe it and intervene.

The underlying idea behind integrating this principle into an intervention paradigm with
the four other principles is that those who have limited resources and are marginalized
and vulnerable are expected to gain equally from a participant-oriented, skills-enhancing
approach based on a positive, broad concept of health. However, the principles should
be modified and applied in line with the actual resources available to specific target
groups within their local contexts.

Developing objectives of health promotion/education

The purpose of health promotion is to positively influence the health behavior of
individuals and communities as well as the living and working conditions that influence
their health.

Objectives

An objective is a brief statement specifying the desired impact, or effect, of a health
promotion program (i.e., how much of what should happen to whom by when).
Characteristics    of   good     program   objectives   include   specificity,   credibility,
measurability, continuity, compatibility and freedom from data constraints. The SMART
acronym is an easy way to remember the key features of well-crafted program objectives;
that is, good objectives are:

S pecific (clear and precise)

M easurable (amenable to evaluation)

A ppropriate (i.e., realistic)

R easonable (i.e., realistic)

T imed (specific time frame provided for achievement of objective)

Short-term Objectives

Whether an objective is short or long-term is relative to the length of time needed to
achieve the program goal. As a general rule of thumb, the time frame for short-term
objectives can be as short as 2–3 months up to 2 years. The time frame for the
achievement of long-term objectives is usually 2–5 years.

Short-term objectives specify the short-term, or intermediate, results that need to occur
to bring about sustainable long-term changes. For example, changes in knowledge need
to take place to bring about longterm changes in health-related behaviours, or levels of
support for a healthy public policy among decision makers need to increase before the
policy can be implemented.

Here are some examples of short-term objectives:

At the end of the first year of the program, 90%of teen mothers in Natureville will know
where to get birth control for free.

By the end of the first year, 80% of participating parents will have increased access to
affordable, nutritious food through participation the community kitchen program and the
bulk-buying club.
Long-term Objectives

Long-term objectives specify the outcomes or changes needed to achieve program goals,
such as the reduction in the incidence of a health problem, or changes in health status
resulting from the implementation of a healthy public policy or environmental supports.

Here are some examples of long-term program objectives:

By the end of the third year, the incidence of teen pregnancies in Natureville will decline
by 50%.

To reduce the incidence of social and developmental problems associated with poor child
nutrition in innercity by 2002.

Importance of developing objectives

It is essential that objectives created for your health promotion project:

are specific/non-ambiguous

are realistic.

As stated above, the objectives set out the assumptions and relationships you believe
exist between what you want to happen and how you plan to make it happen.

Learning Activities

Devise lesrning activities




Self-Assessment Questions

List the Five Principles of health promotion

A Broad and Positive Health Concept

Participation and Involvement
Action and Action Competence

Health Should be Viewed from a “Settings Perspective”

Equity in Health

Write examples of short-term objectives:

At the end of the first year of the program, 90%of teen mothers in Natureville will know
where to get birth control for free.

By the end of the first year, 80% of participating parents will have increased access to
affordable, nutritious food through participation the community kitchen program and the
bulk-buying club.

What are the key features of well-crafted program objectives?

S pecific (clear and precise)

M easurable (amenable to evaluation)

A ppropriate (i.e., realistic)

R easonable (i.e., realistic)

T imed (specific time frame provided for achievement of objective)




Answers to Self-Assessment questions

1). List the Five Principles of health promotion

A Broad and Positive Health Concept

Participation and Involvement

Action and Action Competence
Health Should be Viewed from a “Settings Perspective”

Equity in Health

Write examples of short-term objectives:

At the end of the first year of the program, 90%of teen mothers in Natureville will know
where to get birth control for free.

By the end of the first year, 80% of participating parents will have increased access to
affordable, nutritious food through participation the community kitchen program and the
bulk-buying club.

What are the key features of well-crafted program objectives?

S pecific (clear and precise)

M easurable (amenable to evaluation)

A ppropriate (i.e., realistic)

R easonable (i.e., realistic)

T imed (specific time frame provided for achievement of objective)




2.6 Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials

The following resources are provided:
 Teaching charts             Sound system                  Weighing scales/materials

 Stationery                      Recording                 Cleaning materials
                                 materials/computers
 Computer – internet,                                      Bronchures
                                 VCD/DVDs              -
 Pamphlets                       audio,videos              Models

 Posters /flip-charts
2.7 References

Hartwig, K., Calleson, D., and Williams, M. (2006). Unit 1, section 1.1: Definitions,
rationale and key principles in CBPR. In Developing and sustaining community-based
participatory research partnerships: A skill-building curriculum. Retrieved from
https://depts.washington.edu/ccph/cbpr/u1/u11.php

Health Research & Educational Trust. (2016, July). Applying research principles to the
community health needs assessment process. Chicago, IL: Health Research &
Educational Trust. Accessed at https://www.aha.org/ahahret-guides/2016-07-15-
applying-research-principles-community-health-needs-assessment-process
                                   CHAPTER SEVEN

              PROVISION OF PSYCHOSOCIAL HEALTH SUPPORT

  Unit of learning code HE/CU/TT/CC/07/6/A

  Related Unit of Competency in Occupational Standard Provide Psychosocial Health
  Support Services

Introduction to the unit of learning

This Unit describes the competencies required to provide psychosocial health support. It
involves identifying and assessing patients for psychosocial healthcare, caring for patients
with psychosocial health needs, linking same patients to appropriate psychosocial
healthcare, following–up on psychosocial healthcare support and documenting
psychosocial health support services.

  Summary of Learning Outcomes
   1   Identify and assess patients for psychosocial healthcare need
   2   Care for patients with psychosocial health needs
   3   Follow up on psychosocial healthcare support
   4   Document psychosocial healthcare support

Learning Outcome 1: Identify and assess patients for psychosocial healthcare need.

  Introduction to the learning outcome

  This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to identify and
  assess patients for psychosocial healthcare need. It includes Basic counselling skills,
  Identification of psychosocial needy patients, Psychosocial health needs, Components
  of psychosocial healthcare and Patient assessment of psychosocial needs.

  Performance Standard

  1.1 Patient for psychosocial healthcare support is identified as per the WHO standards
  and Psychosocial Healthcare Standards.
1.2 Rapport is created between the healthcare giver and the patient as per WHO and
Psychosocial Healthcare Standards.

1.3 Patient is assessed for psychosocial healthcare need as per WHO standards and work
place policy.

1.4 Nature and extent of psychosocial healthcare need is analysed in accordance with
Psychosocial Healthcare Standards and WHO standards.

7.3 Information Sheet

Definition of terms

Human Psychology: The scientific study of behavior and mental processes.

Human development: The scientific study of the changes that occur in people as they age
from conception until death.

Development: refers to systematic continuities and changes in the individual that occur
between conception (when the father’s sperm penetrates the mother’s ovum, creating a
new organism) and death.

Counselling: refers to a form of confidential helping which values and seeks to elicit
each client’s innate internal resources, coping abilities and strengths.

Basic Human Psychology

Human Psychology refers the scientific study of behavior and mental processes.
Behavior includes all of our outward or overt actions and reactions, such as talking, facial
expressions, and movement. The term mental processes refer to all the internal, covert
activity of our minds, such as thinking, feeling, and remembering. Why “scientific”? To
study behavior and mental processes in both animals and humans, researchers must
observe them. Whenever a human being observes anyone or anything, there’s always a
possibility that the observer will see only what he or she expects to see. Psychologists
don’t want to let these possible biases cause them to make faulty observations. They
want to be precise, and to measure as carefully as they can—so they use the scientific
method to study psychology.
The major goals of studying human psychology include:

Description human behavior

Explanation human behavior

Prediction human behavior and

Control human behavior

Understanding behavior is dependent on the particular view point taken, in other words,
how any behavior is interpreted will depend on the theory used to explain it.

For example, a behaviorist (more on this in later pages) would conclude that, for
example, smoking is encouraged by the approval of significant people in one’s life, and
it persists because of this continuing approval (before it becomes an addiction ), whereas
a Freudian might conclude that smoking is a behavior which points to the person having
not coped adequately with a particular conflict early in life. The former concludes that
behavior will be repeated when it is approved, whereas the latter places weight on
experiences in early life as having influences on how the person behaves in later life.

The five major perspectives are:

Biological Perspective: From this perspective psychologists primarily study the brain
and nervous system with a view to understanding how these bodily structures influence
behavior. We act in the world using our bodies. By that I mean we move, walk, see, taste,
hear, touch and smell with our sensory systems. We think and reason about the world
using our senses, which are mediated through the body, through the nervous system and
neuromuscular equipment. This means that psychology cannot be disentangled from
biology. The study of the brain, nervous system and hormones helps with an
understanding of how we learn about the world, what we want in and from the world,
and why we act in the ways that we do. For example, we know that the sensory system
(sight, hearing, touching, tasting, smelling) is the primary means by which we receive
information about the world, from birth.
Behavioral perspective: This is the study of learning by observing the direct effects of
external environmental stimuli on behavior and behavior change. It refers to the study
of behavior change. It is based on the assumption that behavior change signifies that
learning has taken place. Behaviorism’s greatest impact has been the development of
therapies for fears and phobias, anxiety disorders, the management of unwanted or
challenging behaviors and its contribution to Cognitive Behavioral Therapy.

Psychoanalytic perspective: The study of the influence of childhood experiences on
current psychological or emotional states. Psychoanalysis was founded by Sigmund
Freud a medical doctor) as a method of inquiry, a theory of mind and a mode of treatment
for complex psychological problems.

Cognitive perspective: This is the study of cognition mental processes including
memory,        perception,        information      processing,       psychophysiology,
psychoneuroimmunology and social cognition. Cognitive psychology is concerned with
thought processes. It is originally based on experimental studies of memory, perception
and information processing.

Humanistic perspective: This is the subjective study of human experience. Humanistic
psychologists are concerned with individual perceptions and interpretations which are
influenced by social and cultural meanings and past experiences. Therefore individual
perceptions may change over time and vary in different social and cultural settings. The
main focus is the individual’s sense of self.

Professionals in the field of psychology

Psychology is a large field, and the many professionals working within it have different
training, different focuses, and may have different goals from the typical psychologist.

Psychologists undergo intense academic training, learning about many different areas of
psychology before choosing a specialization.

Clinical psychologists: aim to reduce psychological distress and enhance and promote
psychological well being. They further deal with assessment and diagnosis of
psychological disorders.
Educational psychology: Educational psychology is the study of how humans learn in
educational settings, the effectiveness of educational interventions, the psychology of
teaching.

Health psychologists: apply psychological research and methods to the strategic
prevention and management of disease, the promotion and maintenance of health, the
identification of psychological factors that contribute to physical illness, and the
formulation of health policy.

Counseling psychologists: apply psychology to working collaboratively with people
across a diverse range of human problems. This includes helping people manage difficult
life events such as bereavement, past and present relationships and mental health
problems such as depression.

Forensic psychologists: Forensic psychologists apply psychological principles to
understand the behavior of judges, attorneys, courtroom juries, and others in the criminal
justice system.

Personality psychologists: These psychologists study people and the differences among
them. The goal is to develop theories that explain the psychological processes of
individuals, and to focus on individual differences

Sports psychologists: This field studies the psychological aspects of sports behavior. The
goal is to understand the psychological factors that influence performance in sports,
including the role of exercise and team interactions.

Biopsychology and neuroscience: This field examines the physiological bases of
behavior in animals and humans by studying the functioning of different brain areas and
the effects of hormones and neurotransmitters on behavior.

Developmental psychology: Mainly focusing on the development of the human mind
through the life span, developmental psychology seeks to understand how people come
to perceive, understand, and act within the world and how these processes change as they
age.
Social psychology: Social psychology is the study of the nature and causes of human
social behavior, with an emphasis on how people think towards each other and how they
relate        to each other.

Basic Human development and Behavior

Beginning to understanding how we come to be the people we are is a critical step in
understanding ourselves as we are today, and who we may become as we grow older.
From the moment of conception, each of us is headed down a pathway of change,
influenced by our biology, environment, and social interactions, to a final destination
that is the same for all of us.

In development, by describing changes as “systematic,” we imply that they are orderly,
patterned, and relatively enduring, so temporary mood swings and other transitory
changes in our appearances, thoughts, and behaviours are therefore excluded.

We are also interested in continuities in development, or ways in which we remain the
same or continue to reflect our past.

If development represents the continuities and changes an individual experiences from
“womb to tomb,” developmental sciences refer to the study of these phenomena and is
a multidisciplinary enterprise. Although developmental psychology is the largest of
these disciplines, many biologists, sociologists, anthropologists, educators, physicians,
and even historians share an interest in developmental continuity and change, and have
contributed in important ways to our understanding of both human and animal
development.

Because the science of development is multidisciplinary, we use the term
developmentalist to refer to any scholar—regardless of discipline—who seeks to
understand the developmental process.

The second critical developmental process is learning—the process through which our
experiences produce relatively permanent changes in our feelings, thoughts, and
behaviours. Let’s consider a very simple example. Although a certain degree of physical
maturation is necessary before a primary school child can become reasonably proficient
at dribbling a basketball, careful instruction and many, many hours of practice are
essential if this child is ever to approximate the ball-handling skills of a professional
basketball player. Many of our abilities and habits do not simply unfold as part of
maturation; we often learn to feel, think, and behave in new ways from our observations
of and interactions with parents, teachers, and other important people in our lives, as
well as from events that we experience. This means that we change in response to our
environments—particularly in response to the actions and reactions of the people around
us.

Basic Characteristics of Development

Continual and Cumulative Process: Although no one can specify precisely what
adulthood holds in store from even the most meticulous examination of a person’s
childhood, developmentalists have learned that the first 12 years are extremely important
for setting the stage for adolescence and adulthood. Who we are as adolescents and adults
also depends on the experiences we have later in life. Obviously, you are not the same
person you were at age 10 or even at age 15. You have probably grown somewhat,
acquired new academic skills, and developed very different interests and aspirations
from those you had as a standard 5. And the path of such developmental change stretches
ever onward, through middle age and beyond, culminating in the final change that occurs
when we die. In sum, human development is best described as a continual and
cumulative process.

Holistic Process: humans are physical, cognitive, and social beings, and each of these
components of self depends, in part, on changes taking place in other areas of
development. When we say development is holistic, we mean that we develop
physically, psychologically, emotionally, socially and cognitive.

Historical/Cultural Context: Development is also influenced by societal changes:
historical events such as wars, technological breakthroughs such as the development of
the Internet, and social causes such as the gay and lesbian movement. Each generation
develops in its own way, and each generation changes the world for succeeding
generations. So we should not automatically assume that developmental patterns
observed in North American or European children (the most heavily studied populations)
are optimal, or even that they characterize persons developing in other eras or cultural
settings.
Domains of development

There are four major domains of development. They include:

Physical domain: This refers to the development of physical characteristics such as
height, weight, scull formation, motor development

Cognitive domain: This refers to the development of our mental processes such as
information processing, thinking, language, reasoning, moral development

Personality Domain: This refers to the development of our enduring patterns of behavior
including our temperament

Psycho-social Domain: This refers to the development of how we form relationships
and our sense of being male or female.

Lifespan stages of development

Human beings go through 8 major stages of lifespan development. These stages include:

Prenatal Development: This is the stage between conception and birth. This stage
consists of three stages;

Geminal stage: Lasts for 2 weeks after fertilization of the ovum by the sperm when a
zygote is formed and the process of cell division begins as the zygote moves to implant
itself on the uterine wall.

Embryonic stage: Lasts upto 6 weeks after conception. The process of cell division
continues rapidly as the various organs of the human body begin to form.

Fetal stage: This stage lasts between 6 weeks to birth (40 weeks). During this stage,
most of the body organs have been formed are continuing to form and function.

Infancy and toddlerhood: The first year and a half to two years of life are ones of
dramatic growth and change. A newborn, with many involuntary reflexes and a keen
sense of hearing but poor vision, is transformed into a walking, talking toddler within a
relatively short period of time. Caregivers similarly transform their roles from those who
manage feeding and sleep schedules to constantly moving guides and safety inspectors
for mobile, energetic children. Brain development happens at a remarkable rate, as does
physical growth and language development.

Early Childhood stage: Early childhood is also referred to as the preschool years,
consisting of the years that follow toddlerhood and precede formal schooling, roughly
from around ages 2 to 5 or 6. As a preschooler, the child is busy learning language (with
amazing growth in vocabulary), is gaining a sense of self and greater independence, and
is beginning to learn the workings of the physical world. This knowledge does not come
quickly, however, and preschoolers may initially have interesting conceptions of size,
time, space and distance, such as demonstrating how long something will take by holding
out their two index fingers several inches apart.

Middle Childhood stage: The ages of 6-11 comprise middle childhood and much of what
children experience at this age is connected to their involvement in the early grades of
school. Now the world becomes one of learning and testing new academic skills and
assessing one’s abilities and accomplishments by making comparisons between self and
others. Schools participate in this process by comparing students and making these
comparisons public through team sports, test scores, and other forms of recognition. The
brain reaches its adult size around age seven, but it continues to develop. Growth rates
slow down and children are able to refine their motor skills at this point in life. Children
also begin to learn about social relationships beyond the family through interaction with
friends and fellow students; same-sex friendships are particularly salient during this
period.

Adolescence stage: Adolescence is a period of dramatic physical change marked by an
overall physical growth spurt and sexual maturation, known as puberty; timing may vary
by gender, cohort, and culture. It is also a time of cognitive change as the adolescent
begins to think of new possibilities and to consider abstract concepts such as love, fear,
and freedom. Ironically, adolescents have a sense of invincibility that puts them at
greater risk of dying from accidents or contracting sexually transmitted infections that
can have lifelong consequences. Research on brain development helps us understand
teen risk-taking and impulsive behavior. A major developmental task during adolescence
involves establishing one’s own identity. Teens typically struggle to become more
independent from their parents. Peers become more important, as teens strive for a sense
of belonging and acceptance; mixed-sex peer groups become more common. New roles
and responsibilities are explored, which may involve dating, driving, taking on a part-
time job, and planning for future academics.

Young adulthood stage: Late teens, twenties, and thirties are often thought of as early
adulthood (students who are in their mid to late 30s may love to hear that they are young
adults!). It is a time when we are at our physiological peak but are most at risk for
involvement in violent crimes and substance abuse. It is a time of focusing on the future
and putting a lot of energy into making choices that will help one earn the status of a full
adult in the eyes of others. Love and work are the primary concerns at this stage of life.
In recent decades, it has been noted (in the U.S. and other developed countries) that
young adults are taking longer to “grow up.” They are waiting longer to move out of
their parents’ homes, finish their formal education, take on work/careers, get married,
and have children. One psychologist, Jeffrey Arnett, has proposed that there is a new
stage of development after adolescence and before early adulthood, called “emerging
adulthood,” from 18 to 25 (or even 29) when individuals are still exploring their
identities and don’t quite feel like adults yet. Cohort, culture, time in history, the
economy, and socioeconomic status may be key factors in when youth take on adult
roles.

Middle adulthood stage: The late thirties (or age 40) through the mid-60s are referred to
as middle adulthood. This is a period in which physiological aging that began earlier
becomes more noticeable and a period at which many people are at their peak of
productivity in love and work. It may be a period of gaining expertise in certain fields
and being able to understand problems and find solutions with greater efficiency than
before. It can also be a time of becoming more realistic about possibilities in life; of
recognizing the difference between what is possible and what is likely. Referred to as
the sandwich generation, middle-aged adults may be in the middle of taking care of their
children and also taking care of their aging parents. While caring about others and the
future, middle-aged adults may also be questioning their own mortality, goals, and
commitments, though not necessarily experiencing a “mid-life crisis.”

Late adulthood stage: This period of the lifespan, late adulthood, has increased in the
last 100 years, particularly in industrialized countries, as average life expectancy has
increased. Late adulthood covers a wide age range with a lot of variation, so it is helpful
to divide it into categories such as the “young old” (65-74 years old), “old old” (75-84
years old), and “oldest old” (85+ years old). The young old are similar to middle-aged
adults; possibly still working, married, relatively healthy, and active. The old old have
some health problems and challenges with daily living activities; the oldest old are often
frail and in need of long term care. However, many factors are involved and a better way
to appreciate the diversity of older adults is to go beyond chronological age and examine
whether a person is experiencing optimal aging (like the gentleman pictured in Figure 8
who is in very good health for his age and continues to have an active, stimulating life),
normal aging (in which the changes are similar to most of those of the same age), or
impaired aging (referring to someone who has more physical challenge and disease than
others of the same age).



       VIDEO ALERT!

       https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLLTWYyyYlAAFlcYwnB8m8jrSrZv6QWp0
       R




Basic Counselling Skills
Counsellors may help clients with specific problems in the present, but they may also
support clients with long-term problems stemming from the past too.

Rapport building is at the root of effective communication. Especially when providing
psychosocial support, knowing how to develop rapport is key to the success of the
therapeutic process.

When offering psychosocial support, counselling skills come into play as a way of the
care giver to create and maintain rapport with the client. Some of the counselling skills
include:

Listening and attending: Active listening is a term commonly used in relation to
counselling. Several factors that are necessary for complete listening, and these include
the observation of clients’ non-verbal behaviour, as well as understanding verbal content
and meaning. It goes without saying that the ‘way’ something is said is just as important
as the actual words spoken. This last point is especially relevant in the counselling
context, for clients often have difficulty in finding exactly the right words to express the
way they feel. In these circumstances, accompanying non-verbal cues sometimes speak
much more eloquently than words. Listening and attending are, therefore, skills that
always go together in counselling. This is because it is not possible for counsellors to
give clients their full attention without actively listening to them.

Paraphrasing: The word ‘paraphrasing’ refers to the rewording of the content of what
clients say. Reflection and paraphrasing are very similar; the difference between them
being that the former is generally used to describe a rewording of the emotional content,
while the latter is mainly concerned with the factual.

Summarising: The skill of summarising is used when a helper wishes to respond to a
series of statements or, in the case of counselling, to a whole session. Clients often talk
at random, and they are frequently side-tracked into other related (and sometimes
unrelated) issues. This can make it difficult to monitor everything they say, and
formulating an accurate summary also requires active listening and an ability to draw all
the random threads together into a more coherent framework.

Asking questions: One of the difficulties you may find in listening to others is that your
curiosity is aroused, and you are tempted to ask questions in order to get the detail clear
in your own head. Most of us probably ask too many questions in our communications
with other people, and active listening is often diminished as a result. Questions can be
especially problematic in counselling because counsellors sometimes ask questions in
order to get the facts straight for themselves, rather than from a desire to understand the
client’s subjective experience of things.

Other skills include:

Encouraging clients to be specific

Reflecting their feelings

Helping them to clarify their thoughts

Encouraging them to focus on key issues
Offering forms of challenge when needed



     VIDEO ALERT!

3           Quick          Rapport        Building                          Techniques:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FU4TL4-Rpo8




Principles of counselling

Several foundational principles are the underpinnings of best ethical practice and are
viewed as central to the process of ethical decision making within the helping professions

A description of each of the five foundational principles of counselling is as follows:

Autonomy is the principle that addresses respect for independence, and self-
determination. The essence of this principle is allowing an individual the freedom of
choice and action. It addresses the responsibility of the counselor to encourage clients,
when appropriate, to make their own decisions and to act on their own values

Justice: Justice means not discriminating any clients. It means that psychologists should
be in a position to execute reasonable judgment and take precautions to ensure that their
potential biases do not lead to any unjust (discriminating) practices. An injustice occurs
when some benefit to which a person is entitled is denied without good reason or when
some burden is imposed unduly.

Beneficence reflects the counselor’s responsibility to contribute to the welfare of the
client. Simply stated, it means to do good, to be proactive, and also to prevent harm when
possible. Beneficence can come in many forms, such as prevention and early
intervention actions that contribute to the betterment of clients.

Non-maleficence is the concept of not causing harm to others. Often explained as “above
all, do no harm,” this principle is considered by some to be the most critical of all the
principles, even though theoretically they are all of equal weight. This principle reflects
both the idea of not inflicting intentional harm, and not engaging in actions that risk
harming others. Weighing potential harm against potential benefits is important in a
counselor’s efforts toward ensuring “no harm.”

Fidelity involves the notions of loyalty, faithfulness, and honoring commitments. Clients
must be able to trust the counselor and have faith in the therapeutic relationship if growth
is to occur. Therefore, the counselor must take care not to threaten the therapeutic
relationship or to leave obligations unfulfilled.

Identifying patients in need of psycho-social support

It is important for all community health care workers to understand mental illness and
learn how to identify the signs and symptoms. Research shows that:

Approximately 20% of adults in the U.S., or 40 3.8 million people, experience a mental
illness each year according to the National Alliance on Mental Illness

Nearly one out of every five youths from age 13 to 18 will experience a severe mental
disorder during their lifetime

Each year, serious mental illness costs $193.2 billion in lost earnings

Those who live with a serious mental illness also face an increased risk of chronic health
conditions

Over one-third of students with a mental health condition dropout of high school

More than 90% of those who die by suicide have symptoms of a mental health condition.

1% of adults live with schizophrenia

6% with bipolar disorder

9% have experienced at least one major depressive episode

Trying to tell the difference between expected behavior and signs of mental illness is not
always easy, especially in people who are under stress. Although there is no easy test
and each disorder has its own symptoms, there are some common signs of mental illness
to help you identify those who may benefit from psychosocial health support.

Anxiety and depression: We all feel stressed or sad from time to time. However, anxiety
and depression can be a sign of mental health issues when it is constant and interferes
with other activities. If you have noticed your client has lost interest, seems sad or
irritable all the time, and lacks motivation and energy, they may be suffering from more
than sadness. Symptoms of anxiety may include shortness of breath, headaches, diarrhea
or a racing mind. Your client may not share these symptoms with you, but by watching
their behavior and their ability to stay on track during a conversation, the symptoms may
become evident.

Extreme mood changes: We all experience times when moods change, but sudden and
dramatic changes in mood, such as uncontrollable “highs,” feelings of euphoria,
prolonged or strong feelings of anger or irritability may be symptoms of mental illness.

Changes in sleeping habits or feeling constantly fatigued: To maintain optimal health,
we need 8 hours of sleep each night. When an individual experiences persistent changes
in sleeping patterns, this might indicate a mental illness. Insomnia can be a sign of
anxiety, depression or substance abuse. In some cases, your client may be sleeping 8 or
more hours and still feel fatigued on a consistent basis. This is another indication they
may be struggling with a mental health condition.

Weight or appetite changes: Some people eat more when they are under stress or feeling
bad, and others eat less. This effects weight gain or loss and is also a warning sign of a
mental health condition or eating disorder.

Inability to deal with daily activities: This may include avoiding friends and social
activities, changes in sex drive, or recent withdrawal and loss of Interest in activities
your client previously enjoyed. Students may demonstrate an unusual drop in function
at school, such as quitting sports or failing grades. Adults may demonstrate a similar
drop in function at work, such as not meeting deadlines and poor performance.

Heightened sensitivity: Demonstrating a heightened sensitivity to sights, sounds, smells
or touch, such as avoiding over-stimulating situations or jumping dramatically at loud
noises, may also indicate mental health conditions.
Feeling guilty or worthless: Some experiencing mental health conditions express
feelings or thoughts such as “I’m a failure,” “It’s my fault” or “I’m worthless.”

Difficulty relating to other people: Your client may express confused thinking or
constant problems concentrating, difficulty understanding or relating to people and
difficulty perceiving reality, including an inability to perceive changes in their own
feelings that may appear as a lack of insight

Substance abuse: If it appears your client is drinking an excessive amount of alcohol,
relying on alcohol each day, using other recreational or prescription drugs to cope with
life or exhibiting drug-seeking behavior, they may suffer from an addiction problem and
an underlying mental health condition for which they are attempting to self-medicate.

Multiple physical ailments without obvious causes: Vague physical complaints, such
as headaches, stomach aches and ongoing aches and pains without a current diagnosis
explaining the symptoms, is another sign of a mental health condition. In this case, it is
important your client is evaluated for an underlying medical condition which may not
have been diagnosed.

Assessment of the patient for psychological health care needs

Psychological assessment contributes important information to the understanding of
individual characteristics and capabilities, through the collection, integration, and
interpretation of information about an individual. Such information is obtained through
a variety of methods and measures, with relevant sources determined by the specific
purposes of the evaluation and these methods and measures are known as the assessment
tools.

Key factors that should be considered when selecting an assessment tool include:

the purpose for which the tests are being used

Users Knowledge of typical items, quantity and range of items

relevance of the test items to the job criteria

Potential acceptability to clients
accuracy of the measures (including risks associated with unfair discrimination and test
bias)

costs of materials and other implementation costs

suitability of automated reports available to audience

Major assessment tools include:

Psychological test is an objective and standardized measure of an individual's mental
and/or behavioral characteristics. Psychological tests include personality test
(Rorschach inkblot test, Thematic Apperception Test (TAT), Sentence completion test,
Create drawings (Draw a person test) or complete a story. Minnesota Multiphasic
Personality Inventory, Millon Clinical Multiaxial Inventory (MCMI ), The California
Psychological Inventory (CPI) , Sixteen Personality Factor Questionnaire (or 16PF) ,
The Eyesenck Personality Inventory, Myer Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI),

Intelligence tests (Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scales and Wechsler intelligence
scales(Wechsler intelligence scale for children and Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale)

Neuropsychological testing: Luria- Nebraska battery, Halsted- Reitan battery Michigan
neuropsychological       battery,   Shipley   Institute   of   Living   Scale,   NIMHANS
neuropsychological battery.

The Interview: The interview as a tool of psychological assessment typically involves
more than talk. If the interview is conducted face-to-face, then the interviewer is
probably taking note of not only the content of what is said but also the way it is being
said. More specifically, the interviewer is taking note of both verbal and nonverbal
behavior. Nonverbal behavior may include the interviewee’s “body language,”
movements and facial expressions in response to the interviewer, the extent of eye
contact, and apparent willingness to cooperate.

The Portfolio: Students and professionals in many different fields of endeavor ranging
from art to architecture keep files of their work products. These work products—whether
retained on paper, canvas, fi lm, video, audio, or some other medium—constitute what
is called a portfolio.
Case History Data: Case history data refers to records, transcripts, and other accounts
in written, pictorial, or other form that preserve archival information, official and
informal accounts, and other data and items relevant to an assessee. Case history data
may include files or excerpts from files maintained at institutions and agencies such as
schools, hospitals, employers, religious institutions, and criminal justice agencies.

Behavioral Observation: If you want to know how someone behaves in a particular
situation, observe his or her behavior in that situation. Such “down-home” wisdom
underlies at least one approach to evaluation. Behavioral observation, as it is employed
by assessment professionals, may be defined as monitoring the actions of others or
oneself by visual or electronic means while recording quantitative and/or qualitative
information regarding the actions.

Role-Play Tests: Role play may be defined as acting an improvised or partially
improvised part in a simulated situation. A role-play test is a tool of assessment wherein
assessees are directed to act as if they were in a particular situation. Assessees may then
be evaluated with regard to their expressed thoughts, behaviors, abilities, and other
variables.

Assessing patients involves the following components:

General Observations: Appearance, Speech, Behavior, Cooperativeness

Thinking: Thought Process, Thought Content, Perceptions

Emotion: Mood, Affect,

Cognition: Orientation/Attention, Memory, Insight, Judgment

Psychosocial Health Needs

Psychosocial needs is a term used to represent patient and family's mental, social,
cultural, spiritual, and developmental needs arising from emotional responses to their
diagnosis, social and role limitations, loss of physical and/or mental abilities. These
needs may include:

Debilitating disease
Stress

Depression

Anxiety

Grief

Burn - out

Table 1.1 Psychosocial Needs and Formal Services to Address Them
    Psychosocial Need     Health Services
    Information about     Provision of information, e.g., on illness, treatments, effects on
    illness, treatments,   health, and psychosocial services, and help to patients/families in
    health, and services   understanding and using the information
    Help in coping with   Peer support programs
    emotions
    accompanying          Counseling/psychotherapy to individuals or groups
    illness          and
    treatment             Pharmacological management of mental symptoms
    Help in managing      Comprehensive illness self-management/self-care programs
    illness
    Assistance        in  Behavioral/health promotion interventions, such as:
    changing behaviors
    to minimize impact    Provider assessment/monitoring of health behaviors (e.g.,
    of disease             smoking, exercise)

                            Brief physician counseling

                            Patient education, e.g., in cancer-related health risks and risk-
                            reduction measures
    Material         and    Provision of resources
    logistical resources,
    such               as
    transportation
    Help in managing        Family and caregiver education
    disruptions in work,
    school, and family      Assistance with activities of daily living (ADLs), instrumental
    life                    ADLs, chores
                              Legal protections and services, e.g., under the children’s Act

                              Cognitive testing and educational assistance
    Financial     advice      Financial planning/counseling, including management of day-to-
    and/or assistance         day activities such as bill paying

                              Insurance (e.g., health, disability) counseling

                              Eligibility assessment/counseling for other benefits (e.g.,
                              Supplemental Security Income, Social Security Disability Income)

                              Supplement financial grants




Components of psychosocial healthcare

Psychosocial health is the result of complex interaction between a person’s history and
his or her thoughts about and interpretations of the past and what the past means to

The major components of Psychosocial health are:

Mental health:      The thinking you. This is the “thinking” or “rational” part of
psychosocial health. Mentally healthy people tend to respond to life’s challenges
constructively. Irrational thinking may indicate poor mental health.

Emotional Health: The feeling you. The “feeling” or subjective side of psychosocial
health that includes emotional reactions to life. Emotions are intensified feelings and
complex patterns and include: love, hate, frustration, anxiety, and joy.

Social health: Interactions with others. This is the aspect of psychosocial health that
includes interactions with others, ability to use social supports, and ability to adapt to
various situations. It also includes social bonds and social support.

Spiritual health: An inner quest for well-being. This refers to a belief in a unifying force
that gives purpose or meaning to life, a sense of belonging, a feeling of connection to
other people, to nature, or God or other higher power.
Psychosocial health care may include the following aspects:

Basic counseling

Drug adherence

Feeding

Advise for medical checkup

Accompanying for medical care
Learning Activities

7.1.4.1 Practical Activity

Task 1: Attend the nearest GBV center in your community and carry out a psychosocial
assessment of the health care workers in that community.

7.1.4.2 Self-Assessment
 You are provided with the following questions for self -assessment, attempt them and check
 your responses




What is human psychology?

Who is a developmentalist?

Which are the major components of psychosocial health?

What are the 8 stages of lifespan development?

Which personality tests can you use to assess a client for psychosocial needs?

Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials

The following resources are provided:

A counseling room with seats, a desk and tissues

Assessment documents

Computers

Stationery

Note book
7.1.5 References

Corey, G. (2012). Theory and Practice of Counseling,8th Edition: Cengage Learning,
USA

Myers, D. (2014). Psychology of Everyday Life. Worth Publisher, New York

https://courses.lumenlearning.com/wm-lifespandevelopment/chapter/periods-of-
human-development/

https://www.counseling.org/docs/default-source/ethics/practioner-39-s-guide-to-
ethical-decision-making.pdf

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK4017/table/a200147b7ttt00002/?report=obje
ctonly

https://journals.lww.com/cancernursingonline/Abstract/1997/10000/Intervening_with_t
he_psychosocial_needs_of.6.aspx

Responses to self - assessment questions

What is human psychology?

Human Psychology refers the scientific study of behavior and mental processes.

Who is a developmentalist?

It refers to any scholar—regardless of discipline—who seeks to understand the
developmental process

Which are the major components of psychosocial health?

Mental health

Emotional Health

Social health
  Spiritual health

  What are the 8 stages of lifespan development?

  Prenatal development

  Infancy/toddlerhood

  Early childhood

  Middle childhood

  Adolescence

  Young adulthood

  Middle adulthood

  Late adulthood

  Which personality tests can you use to assess a client for psychosocial needs?

  Rorschach inkblot test, Thematic Apperception Test (TAT), Sentence completion test,
  Create drawings (Draw a person test) or complete a story. Minnesota Multiphasic
  Personality Inventory, Millon Clinical Multiaxial Inventory (MCMI ), The California
  Psychological Inventory (CPI) , Sixteen Personality Factor Questionnaire (or 16PF) ,
  The Eyesenck Personality Inventory, Myer Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI),

Learning Outcome 2: Care for patients with psychosocial health needs

  7.2.1 Introduction to the learning outcome

  This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to care for patients
  with psychosocial health need. It includes prioritizing psychological needs, standards for
  psychosocial health care services, psychosocial healthcare team, collaborative
  approaches, effective communication in psychosocial health care, critical thinking and
  Care for the care giver
7.2.2 Performance Standard

2.1 Psychosocial health needs are prioritised as per the assessment report analysis.

2.2 Specific psychosocial health care is given as per Standards for Psychosocial
Healthcare and WHO standards.

2.3 Requirements for offering psychosocial health care support are identified and
gathered as per WHO standards and work place policy.

2.4 Collaborative care between psychosocial and biomedical care is provided as per work
policy, Standards for Psychosocial Healthcare and WHO standards

2.5 Patient is linked to psychosocial services as per work policy, Standards for
Psychosocial Healthcare and WHO standards

7.2.3 Information Sheet

Definition of terms

Mental health: This refers to our emotional, psychological, and social well-being. It
affects how we think, feel, and act. It also helps determine how we handle stress, relate
to others, and make choices.

Case Management: This is a collaborative process of assessment, planning, facilitation,
care coordination, evaluation and advocacy for options and services to meet an
individual’s and family’s comprehensive health needs through communication and
available resources to promote patient safety, quality of care, and cost effective
outcomes.

Screening: This is the preliminary assessment of a client to ascertain his or her fitness
for health related or psychiatric therapy in general, a particular treatment strategy,

Prioritizing psychological needs

The World Health Organization (WHO) embraces a definition of health as “physical,
mental, and social well-being”. Of these elements, mental well-being historically has
been misunderstood and often forgotten. WHO has spent the last five years actively
addressing the barriers that prevent access to mental health care and campaigning for the
full incorporation of mental health in worldwide public health.

Mental health is described by WHO as:

“… a state of well-being in which the individual realizes his or her own abilities, can
cope with the normal stresses of life, can work productively and fruitfully, and is able to
make a contribution to his or her community.”

In this positive sense mental health is the foundation for well-being and effective
functioning for an individual and for a community. This core concept of mental health
is consistent with its wide and varied interpretation across cultures.

The Theory of Basic Psychological Needs postulates that human beings have three
inborn basic needs: autonomy, competence, and relatedness.

The need for autonomy is the freedom to determine, plan and implement one’s
behaviours and living- as different from being independent. The system of selfhood that
is related with the system of autonomy, and social supports are the primary determinants
of how to cope with stress

Competence is one’s belief in his or her ability to cope with a certain state. People need
a certain amount of effectiveness and confidence in their activities. Negative feedbacks
given by others will reduce the feeling of competence and may discourage individuals
and cause them not to take part in activities.

Relatedness is the need for belonging It enables individuals to interact with a warm and
friendly atmosphere and with people providing such an environment, and to experience
the sense of belonging and relatedness. An individual lives the self in such an
environment. It is thought that environments supporting autonomy require more
activeness and more participation, which facilitate individuals’ development. People
need to contact and interact with others and to feel that the relations exist and will
continue to exist.
Psychological health depends on satisfying the three needs. All of the needs contribute
to effective functioning and to psychological health. None of them could be disclaimed.
Besides, needs are complementary to each other rather than in conflict. The three basic
needs are the unchanging universal tendencies which are inherently available in humans
and which therefore do not differ from culture to culture. Meeting the needs, which is a
nutrient to human soul, feeds the psychological well being while failure to meet the needs
or hindering it, that is to say, hunger due to the lack of food, may cause ill being.

Standards for psychosocial health care services

Many different providers of health services—some in oncology, some delivering health
care for other complex health conditions—recognize that psychosocial problems can
have both direct and indirect effects on health and have developed interventions to
address them. Some of these interventions are derived from theoretical or conceptual
frameworks; some are based on research findings; and some have undergone empirical
testing.

The best have all three characteristics. When viewed together, these interventions
evidence common elements that point to a model for the effective delivery of
psychosocial health services. The components of this model include;

identifying patients with psychosocial health needs that are likely to affect their health
or health care, and developing with patients appropriate plans for

linking patients to appropriate psychosocial health services,

supporting patients in managing their illness,

coordinating psychosocial with biomedical health care, and

following up on care delivery to monitor the effectiveness of services and determine
whether any changes are needed.

Effective patient–provider communication is central to all of these components. A
combination of several activities rather than any single activity by itself (e.g., screening,
case management, illness self-management) is needed to deliver appropriate
psychosocial health care effectively to individuals with complex health conditions. This
conclusion also is supported by the findings of several systematic reviews of
psychosocial care. For example, not surprisingly, screening by itself is less effective than
screening with follow-up. The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, for instance,
recommends screening for depression in adults in clinical practices only when practices
have systems in place to ensure effective follow-up treatment and ongoing monitoring.
This recommendation reflects research finding that only small benefits result from
screening by itself, but larger benefits when screening is accompanied by effective
follow-up.




Figure 1.1 Model for the delivery of psychosocial health services.

Collaborative approaches

This is also known as care coordination. Care coordination is the deliberate organization
of patient care activities between two or more participants (including the patient)
involved in a patient’s care to facilitate the appropriate delivery of health care services.
Organizing care involves the marshalling of personnel and other resources needed to
carry out all required patient care activities, and is often managed by the exchange of
information among participants responsible for different aspects of care. Care
coordination as a psychosocial intervention must fulfill a dual function: coordination of
psychosocial health services with biomedical services, and coordination of biomedical
care provided by multiple clinicians.

Healthcare systems around the world face both increasing demands and inequality in
service distribution. The current trend is for collaboration among healthcare actors,
named as collaborative healthcare, in order to address challenges such as these to
improve the social sustainability of the system. That is to provide accessible and
equitable healthcare services to meet people’s health and well-being needs.

In order to address the complex social, emotional, psychological, and spiritual needs
patients, health care worker collaborate with a number of psychosocial colleagues,
including but not limited to:

social workers,

child life specialists,

chaplains,

educators,

creative arts therapists,

Clinical psychologist,

Counselor, and

Medical clinicians

Although psychosocial teams differ across institutions in size and composition, they all
work to integrate their individual expertise and provide the highest quality care for
patients and families.
Essential elements of successful psychosocial collaboration include

shared goals,

role clarity, and

effective communication.




Effective communication in psychosocial health care

At the heart of an effective model of psychosocial care delivery is a well-functioning
patient–provider partnership, characterized, in large part, by effective communication.
Communicating effectively means that patients are able to receive and understand
information about their illness and health care, and clearly express their needs for
assistance and the values and personal resources that will shape the health care system’s
response to these needs.

Patients should be comfortable with asking questions of all their care providers and
equally comfortable with responding to questions posed to them. They should be
competent and at ease as a member of their own health care team, which will make
decisions about the best strategy for addressing their illness. Patients with language
barriers, cognitive deficits, or other impediments to communication should receive
assistance in overcoming these barriers to effective communication.

In many instances, members of the patient’s family also are involved in this
communication. In pediatric cases, a family member may be the primary communicator
and participant in planning care; with adults, some patients may also have limited
capacity to communicate. Even when adult patients are able to communicate, family
members are key caregivers, especially for older adults. Treatment planning and
planning for managing the effects of illness requires communication with the patient’s
caregivers as well as with the patient. When patients do not have the capacity to
participate actively themselves, there needs to be an explicit substitute who is legally
and psychologically able to act as the patient’s advocate.
Care providers similarly should possess the communication skills necessary to be
effective clinicians and supportive partners in care—a hallmark of high-quality health
care and health care professionals. These communication skills include establishing a
good interpersonal relationship with the patient.

Key aspects of effective patient–clinician communication identified in the National
Cancer Institute (NCI) report Patient-Centered Communication in Cancer Care include:

fostering healing relationships,

exchanging information,

responding to emotions,

managing uncertainty,

making decisions, and

enabling patient self management

Linking Patients to Psychosocial Health Services

Several mechanisms used to link patients with psychosocial health services delivered by
health and human service providers have empirical support, although the strength of this
support varies. These mechanisms include structured referral arrangements and formal
agreements with external providers, case management, and collocation and clinical
integration of services. Use of care/system navigators is also being studied for its
effectiveness in linking patients with needed services.

Structured Referral: Although referral to other organizational or individual providers is
a common mechanism for linking individuals with psychosocial health services, there
has been little study of the general effectiveness of such referrals. Most studies of referral
have addressed referrals between physicians. These and one Australian study of referrals
of cancer patients to psychosocial services indicate high rates of failure to connect
individuals to the referred providers, frequent failure of the referred individuals to accept
the referred services, and failure to track the outcomes of referrals. Referring patients to
external providers is likely to continue to be a primary mechanism for linking patients
with needed psychosocial health services because it requires fewer organizational and
physical plant resources than offering all psychosocial services on site. To conserve both
psychosocial health services and the personnel and resources needed to make referrals,
however, it is important for providers to implement approaches for doing so efficiently
and effectively.

Case Management: Case management consists of a variety of activities necessary to
coordinate some or all of the health-related care needed by patients. Although these
activities often vary with the severity of the illness, the needs of the individual, and the
specific model of case management employed, case management services that address
psychosocial health needs typically include assessment of the patient’s need for
supportive services; individual care planning, referral, and connection of the patient with
other necessary services and supports; ongoing monitoring of the patient’s care plan;
advocacy and education; and monitoring of the patient’s symptoms. These activities can
be performed by an appointed individual or a group.

On-site Collocation and Clinical Integration of Services: Multiple studies of mental
health care have found that same-site delivery of mental health and primary care is
effective in linking patients to the collocated services and can improve treatment
outcomes. In a 1995 study of a nationally representative sample of outpatient drug use
treatment units, same-site delivery of services was more effective than formal
arrangements with external providers, referral agreements, or case management in
ensuring that patients would utilize necessary services (a first step in collaborative care).
Integrating psychosocial health care into medical care settings facilitates patient follow-
through on referrals, allows for face-to-face verbal communication in addition to or as
an alternative to communicating in writing, and allows for informal sharing of the views
of different disciplines and easy exchange of expertise. Studies of care collaboration also
have shown that physical proximity of would-be collaborators facilitates collaboration.

Care/System Navigators: Use of care/system navigators, as well as individual patient
advocates, is similar to case management and may also help link patients to needed
psychosocial services. Such programs in cancer care were developed initially to help
low-income patients participate in screening for the detection of cancer and aid those
with suspicious screening findings in gaining access to diagnostic and treatment services.
Initially, patient navigators tended to be local community residents without professional
credentials, but more recently some have proposed that nurses, social workers, and other
health workers play a navigator role. This variation in the background of the navigator
relates to differences in role expectations. While all navigator programs focus on helping
patients overcome barriers to receiving effective services, some also include patient
education and patient advocacy roles.

Critical Thinking

Critical thinking is the analysis of an issue or situation and the facts, data or evidence
related to it. Ideally, critical thinking is to be done objectively—meaning without
influence from personal feelings, opinions or biases—and it focuses solely on factual
information.

Critical thinking is a skill that allows you to make logical and informed decisions to the
best of your ability. For example, a child who has not yet developed such skills might
believe the Tooth Fairy left money under their pillow based on stories their parents told
them. A critical thinker, however, can quickly conclude that the existence of such a thing
is probably unlikely—even if there are a few bucks under their pillow.

1. Identification

The first step in the critical thinking process is to identify the situation or problem as
well as the factors that may influence it. Once you have a clear picture of the situation
and the people, groups or factors that may be influenced, you can then begin to dive
deeper into an issue and its potential solutions.




How to improve: When facing any new situation, question or scenario, stop to take a
mental inventory of the state of affairs and ask the following questions:




Who is doing what?

What seems to be the reason for this happening?
What are the end results, and how could they change?




2. Research

When comparing arguments about an issue, independent research ability is key.
Arguments are meant to be persuasive—that means the facts and figures presented in
their favor might be lacking in context or come from questionable sources. The best way
to combat this is independent verification; find the source of the information and
evaluate.




How to improve: It can be helpful to develop an eye for unsourced claims. Does the
person posing the argument offer where they got this information from? If you ask or try
to find it yourself and there’s no clear answer, that should be considered a red flag. It’s
also important to know that not all sources are equally valid—take the time to learn the
difference between popular and scholarly articles.




3. Identifying biases

This skill can be exceedingly difficult, as even the smartest among us can fail to
recognize biases. Strong critical thinkers do their best to evaluate information
objectively. Think of yourself as a judge in that you want to evaluate the claims of both
sides of an argument, but you’ll also need to keep in mind the biases each side may
possess.




How to improve: Challenge yourself to identify the evidence that forms your beliefs, and
assess whether or not your sources are credible.

First and foremost, you must be aware that bias exists. When evaluating information or
an argument, ask yourself the following:
Who does this benefit?

Does the source of this information appear to have an agenda?

Is the source overlooking, ignoring or leaving out information that doesn’t support its
beliefs or claims?

Is this source using unnecessary language to sway an audience’s perception of a fact?




4. Inference

The ability to infer and draw conclusions based on the information presented to you is
another important skill for mastering critical thinking. Information doesn’t always come
with a summary that spells out what it means. You’ll often need to assess the information
given and draw conclusions based upon raw data.




The ability to infer allows you to extrapolate and discover potential outcomes when
assessing a scenario. It is also important to note that not all inferences will be correct.
For example, if you read that someone weighs 260 pounds, you might infer they are
overweight or unhealthy. Other data points like height and body composition, however,
may alter that conclusion.




How to improve: An inference is an educated guess, and your ability to infer correctly
can be polished by making a conscious effort to gather as much information as possible
before jumping to conclusions. When faced with a new scenario or situation to evaluate,
first try skimming for clues—things like headlines, images and prominently featured
statistics—and then make a point to ask yourself what you think is going on.




5. Determining relevance
One of the most challenging parts of thinking critically during a challenging scenario is
figuring out what information is the most important for your consideration. In many
scenarios, you’ll be presented with information that may seem important, but it may pan
out to be only a minor data point to consider.




How to improve: The best way to get better at determining relevance is by establishing
a clear direction in what you’re trying to figure out. Are you tasked with finding a
solution? Should you be identifying a trend? If you figure out your end goal, you can use
this to inform your judgement of what is relevant.




Even with a clear objective, however, it can still be difficult to determine what
information is truly relevant. One strategy for combating this is to make a physical list
of data points ranked in order of relevance. When you parse it out this way, you’ll likely
end up with a list that includes a couple of obviously relevant pieces of information at
the top of your list, in addition to some points at the bottom that you can likely disregard.
From there, you can narrow your focus on the less clear-cut topics that reside in the
middle of your list for further evaluation.




6. Curiosity

It’s incredibly easy to sit back and take everything presented to you at face value, but
that can also be also a recipe for disaster when faced with a scenario that requires critical
thinking. It’s true that we’re all naturally curious—just ask any parent who has faced an
onslaught of “Why?” questions from their child. As we get older, it can be easier to get
in the habit of keeping that impulse to ask questions at bay. But that’s not a winning
approach for critical thinking.
How to improve: While it might seem like a curious mind is just something you’re born
with, you can still train yourself to foster that curiosity productively. All it takes is a
conscious effort to ask open-ended questions about the things you see in your everyday
life, and you can then invest the time to follow up on these questions.




Caring for the caregiver

Caregiving can be physically and emotionally exhausting. Whether you are in the
profession of caregiving or taking care of a loved one, it is important to remember to
recharge your batteries. For family members, caregiving can also lead to additional
pressures, such as financial strain, family conflict, and social withdrawal. Over time,
caregiver stress can lead to burnout, a condition marked by irritability, fatigue, problems
with sleep, weight gain, feelings of helplessness or hopelessness, and social isolation.

Caregiver burnout is an example of how repeated exposure to stress harms mental and
physical health. Chronic stress triggers a release of stress hormones in the body, which
can lead to exhaustion, irritability, a weakened immune system, digestive distress,
headaches, pains, and weight gain, especially in the midsection of the body.
3 ways to care for yourself if you are a caregiver

Self-compassion is essential to self-care: Being kind to yourself builds the foundation
to self-care. Self-compassion means giving yourself credit for the tough, complex work
of caregiving, stepping away from the self-critical, harsh inner voice, and allowing
yourself time — even if it’s just a few minutes a day — to take care of yourself. Lack of
time or energy can make getting that time away particularly challenging. You may even
feel guilty or selfish for paying attention to your own needs. What you need to know is
this: in fact, practicing self-care allows the caregiver to remain more balanced, focused,
and effective, which helps everyone involved.

Make eating well and getting quality sleep priorities: It’s easy to forget about your
own meals and needs when trying to help others. Maintaining adequate sleep and
nutrition are key to preventing caregiver burnout. Build a daily 10-minute nighttime
routine to achieve more restful sleep. Missing meals can lead to irritability and fatigue,
so it is important to eat regularly scheduled meals throughout the day. Nutrition can also
be an important factor to prevent burnout. Chronic stress has been linked to increased
inflammation in the body, so it is helpful to avoid foods that are processed or high in
refined sugars, which increase inflammation in the body. Avoid or reduce alcohol, since
alcohol both increases inflammation in the body and disrupts quality of sleep.

Remain socially connected. Find support through local caregiver support groups:
While it can be difficult to keep social appointments with friends and family in the face
of medical caretaking, it is important to maintain social connections to feel less isolated
and prevent burnout. Realizing that you’re not alone and that others are going through
similar experiences nurtures your ability to be self-compassionate. Hospitals and local
organizations often offer caregiver support groups for family and caregivers.

7.2.4 Learning Activities

Role Play activities

Task 1: Mrs. Maliwaza is 34 years old, 6 months pregnant and has visited the health
center 2 times since for prenatal clinic. As you conduct a home visit to check out on the
patients at the health center, Mrs. Maliwaza explains that she has been feeling dizzy,
fatigued and has been vomiting all the time she eats.
In groups of two, role play how you would link her with relevant heath care providers.




Self-Assessment
You are provided with the following questions for self -assessment, attempt them and check
your responses

 What are the 3 psychosocial needs as postulated by the psychological needs theory?

Which psychosocial support workers can a health care worker collaborate with to
effectively meet patients’ psychosocial needs?

What mechanisms can you us to link a patient with other related service?

In the provision of psychosocial health care, why is important to have an efficient client
- clinician communication?

What are the essential elements of successful psychosocial collaboration?

Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials

The following resources are provided:

A counseling room with seats, a desk and tissues

Assessment documents

Computers

Stationery

Note book

 References

https://www.who.int/mental_health/evidence/MH_Promotion_Book.pdf

https://www.nap.edu/read/11993/chapter/6#160
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK4023/




Responses to self assessment

1.   What are the 3 psychosocial needs as postulated by the psychological needs
theory?

•    Autonomy

•    Relatedness

•    Competence

2.   Which psychosocial support workers can a health care worker collaborate
with to effectively meet patients’ psychosocial needs?

•    social workers,

•    child life specialists,

•    chaplains,

•    educators,

•    creative arts therapists,

•    Clinical psychologist,

•    Counselor, and

•    Medical clinicians

3.   What mechanisms can you us to link a patient with other related service?

Structured referral arrangements and formal agreements with external providers, case
management, and collocation and clinical integration of services and care/system
navigators
  4.        In the provision of psychosocial health care, why is important to have an
  efficient client - clinician communication?

  •         fostering healing relationships,

  •         exchanging information,

  •         responding to emotions,

  •         managing uncertainty,

  •         making decisions, and

  •         enabling patient self management

  5.        What are the essential elements of successful psychosocial collaboration?

  •         shared goals,

  •         role clarity, and

  •         effective communication.




Learning Outcome 3: Follow up on psychosocial healthcare support needs

  7.3.1 Introduction to the learning outcome

  This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to follow up on
  psychosocial health care needs. It includes social support systems, Interpersonal skills,
  monitoring psychosocial patient’s progress, reporting of psychosocial issues

  7.3.2 Performance Standard
       I.     Patient condition is monitored in accordance with Standards for Psychosocial
              Healthcare and WHO standards.
      II.     Routine patient care is provided as per Standards for Psychosocial Healthcare
              and WHO standards.
III.   Patient’s condition is reported to relevant personnel as per work policy,
       Standards for Psychosocial Healthcare and WHO standards.
IV.    Faults are reported and rectified as per workplace policy.

7.3.3 Information Sheet

Definition of terms

Social support: support accessible to an individual through social ties to other
individuals, groups, and the larger community.

Social support systems

The National Cancer Institute's Dictionary of Cancer Terms defines social support as “a
network of family, friends, neighbors, and community members that is available in times
of need to give psychological, physical, and financial help”.

Theoretical models of social support specify the following two important dimensions:

a structural dimension, which includes network size and frequency of social interactions,
and

a functional dimension with emotional (such as receiving love and empathy) and
instrumental (practical help such as gifts of money or assistance with child care)
components.

Most research has found that quality of relationships (functional dimension) is a better
predictor of good health than quantity of relationships (structural dimension), although
both are important.

It should be noted that the optimal source of social support may depend on the
developmental stage of the person who is receiving the support. For example, parental
support seems to be more valuable in early adolescence than it is in late adolescence. It
has been shown that the perception of social support is associated with the degree of
social interaction in the elderly and with instrumental support in younger adults. In a
sample of childhood sexual abuse survivors, a combination of self-esteem support (the
individual perceives that he or she is valued by others) and appraisal support (the
individual perceives that he or she is capable of getting advice when coping with
difficulties) was most useful in preventing the development of PTSD

The persons, agencies and organizations with which a caregiver has contact – directly or
indirectly – are referred to as a person’s social support system.

The benefits of having and using personal support systems include reduced stress,
decreased physical health problems, and improved emotional well-being. Taking stock
of your social support system is an excellent way to assess where your help actually
comes from and who provides it. Taking stock can also help you see reasons why you
don’t ask for or accept assistance, and reasons why people may not offer assistance.

Who are the people and organizations who help you?

Spouse

Parents

Children

Other Relatives

Friends

Other caregivers

Doctor(s)

Nurse(s)

Support group

Church members

Civic group/clubs

Schools
Professional agencies

Public health

Social services

Respite care

Activity programs

Interpersonal skills

Interpersonal skills are measures of how adept you are at interacting with others. Active
listening is an interpersonal skill, as is knowing how to communicate to someone else
that you respect him or her. When problems arise you use your interpersonal skills to
resolve conflict with others. People learn interpersonal skills by interacting with family
members, going to school, and socializing with their peers. Healthy interpersonal skills
reduce stress, resolve conflict, improve communication, enhance intimacy, increase
understanding, and promote joy.

Interpersonal skills include:

Communication skills involve both listening and speaking effectively.

Assertiveness skills involve expressing yourself and your rights without violating others’
rights.

Conflict is natural and inevitable. Conflict resolution skills help you resolve differences
so that you may continue a relationship effectively.

Anger management skills involve recognizing and expressing anger appropriately in
order to achieve goals, handle emergencies, solve problems and even protect our health.

Interpersonal Skills Self-Assessment

Ask yourself the questions below. If you identify with a number of these statements, you
would likely benefit from work on your interpersonal skills.
How often do you…..

Seek approval and affirmation from others, but fear criticism?

Guess at what normal behavior is?

Feel as if you are different from other people?

Isolate yourself from and feel afraid of people in authority roles?

Downplay your own accomplishments and good deeds?

Have difficulty following a project through from beginning to end?

Get    frightened    or   stressed    in    the   company      of     an   angry    person.
Lie in order to avoid conflict?

Judge yourself harshly?

Feel that others (or society) take advantage of you?

Take yourself seriously, and view other relationships just as seriously?

Have problems developing and maintaining intimate relationships?

Feel guilty when you stand up for yourself or put your needs first?

Feel responsible for others and find it easier to have concern for others than for yourself?

Act impulsive, before considering alternative actions or possible consequences?

Have difficulty feeling or expressing your own feelings?

Monitoring psychosocial patient’s progress

Patient follow-up has been cited in identifying effective interventions for improving
health care processes and outcomes. Follow-up can take place in a variety of ways,
including telephone calls to patients to monitor their status, home visits by care managers
or other personnel, as part of a scheduled outpatient visit, or through Internet or web-
based technology.

Follow-up involves two discrete activities. First is the determination of which services,
if any, the patient used, any problems encountered, and satisfaction with services
provided. Second is rescreening and assessment to identify new or unmet needs that are
then addressed.

Routine patient care may include but not limited to:

Communication

Social care support

Feeding

Dressing

Washing/tidying up

Visiting

7.3.4 Learning Activities

7.3.4.1 Role Play activities

Task 1: Mrs. Maliwaza is 34 years old, 8 months pregnant. From a previous home visit
you linked her with a clinician and she tested HIV positive. She was in denial and was
refusing to take her ARVs

In groups of two, role play how you would attach Mrs. Maliwaza to a social support
system.

7.3.4.2 Self-Assessment
 You are provided with the following questions for self -assessment, attempt them and check
 your responses

What are a person’s social support systems?
Who are the people and organizations who can help in offering psychosocial support to
patients?

Which are some of the routine patient care techniques you can use during follow up?

7.3.4.3Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials

The following resources are provided:

A counseling room with seats, a desk and tissues

Assessment documents

Computers

Stationery

Note book

7.3.5 References

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2921311/

https://conflictandhealth.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13031-018-0146-0

https://cpa.ca/docs/File/Task_Forces/Treatment%20Progress%20and%20Outcome%20
Monitoring%20Task%20Force%20Report_Final.pdf

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0157474

Responses to the self assessment

What are a person’s social support systems?

The persons, agencies and organizations with which a caregiver has contact – directly or
indirectly

Who are the people and organizations who can help in offering psychosocial
support to patients?
 Spouse, Parents, Children, Other Relatives, Friends, Other caregivers, Doctor(s),
  Nurse(s), Support group, Church members, Civic group/clubs, Schools, Professional
  agencies, Public health, Social services, Respite care, Activity programs

 Which are some of the routine patient care techniques you can use during follow
  up? Communication, Social care support, Feeding, Dressing, Washing/tidying up,
  Visiting

Learning Outcome 4: Document psychosocial healthcare support

 7.4.1 Introduction to the learning outcome

 This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to document
  psychosocial health care support. It includes documentation of psychosocial healthcare
  services, report writing and dissemination, patient agreement, transfer reports and waste
  disposal

 7.4.2 Performance Standard

 Patient details are documented in accordance with workplace policy.

 Patient’s progress reports are prepared and disseminated to relevant authorities as per
  workplace policy and WHO standards.

 Waste is disposed in due regard to environment protection regulations.

 7.4.3 Information Sheet

 Documentation of psychosocial healthcare services

 Health care workers create, and to the extent the records are under their control, maintain,
  disseminate, store, retain, and dispose of records and data relating to their professional
  and scientific work in order to:

 facilitate provision of services later by them or by other professionals,

 allow for replication of research design and analyses,
meet institutional requirements,

ensure accuracy of billing and payments, and

ensure compliance with law.

In provision of psychosocial healthcare services, the main goal for documenting is to
provide a complete, accurate recording for follow-up, early detection of complications,
and helps to identify areas for improvement.

It also contributes to the circulation of information amongst the different teams involved
in the patient’s treatment or care.

Appropriate records can also help protect both the client and the psychologist in the event
of legal or ethical proceedings.

The medical record is not just a facility document it is also read by Outside readers who
may include:

Insurance companies ,

Surveyors ,

Ombudsmen,

Consultants,

Medicare intermediaries,

Authorized family members,

Lawyers

Documentation must include reports of patient and/or family impact of illness, of
assessments conducted, nature and impact of psychosocial services provided, monitoring
of illness status, and treatment plans.
Psychosocial providers must be familiar with professional codes of ethics and state
regulations about protection of the privacy of health information and limits of privacy
protection.

Documentation and communication with other professionals must reflect appropriate
understanding of what information is essential for team members and/or family members
to know, when specific permission is needed, and what different rules apply under
extraordinary conditions of risk of harm.

Treatment facilities may impose their own requirements for documentation as long as
they comply with state regulations, which represent the final authority. The creation and
handling of electronic medical record information should be governed by the same
professional rules as other health care communication.

Preparing and disseminating the patient’s progress reports

The patient's report must rest on empirically solid data, synthesized and explained at a
level that a layman can understand, and answer the central question at hand eg “What’s
underlying the patient’s problems with attention?”

To write a good report you should:

Verify that your report relies on solid data. Before the report writing even begins, make
sure that the tests you will be citing in the report are backed by the latest research and
were used appropriately. That process includes keeping up with the literature regarding
whether a test produces different results for different racial/ethnic groups.

Not hide behind the test results: Don’t hide behind the data, but rather write about what
those findings reflect about the patient. The main concern, is understanding how to solve
the problems that prompted the evaluation

Consider incorporating diversity and cultural context: A report might detail the
patient’s family background, romantic relationships and educational or developmental
history. But should also include a section that explores other formative experiences,
including those that involve race, sexuality or socioeconomic status
Synthesize and conceptualize the findings: Integrate findings from multiple sources into
a single section. Our recommendations are much more likely to be taken if they are
understood in a very coherent, narrative way how we are conceptualizing them.

Address discordant results: It’s not uncommon for different tests to produce divergent
or discordant results. When writing your report, resist the temptation to play up the test
you favor and downplay the one with divergent results.

Strip out the jargon: Because numerous individuals may read the report, look at each
paragraph and consider: Will a layman understand what I’m saying? If it’s meaningful
and palatable to a non-trained reader, it will be for a trained reader as well.

Consider the patient’s perspective: Along with outlining a patient's vulnerabilities, it’s
also important—for patients, who will likely read the report, as well as for treatment
planning.

Cull the report to its essence: Most of the time when you get a really long report, it’s
because someone was doing a data dump rather than an integrated, well-thought-out,
thematically organized report. It’s helpful to write a summary of the referral question
and primary conclusion at the beginning of the report and follow with a more detailed
explanation further on.

Don’t lose sight of the narrative: Check that the report hasn’t simply broken down an
individual into pieces based on their scores on tests. A report should tell a narrative about
the person, and how all these pieces fit together.

While disseminating progress reports on psychosocial health care services, a health care
worker ought to:

maintain confidentiality in creating, storing, accessing, transferring, and disposing of
records under their control, whether these are written, automated, or in any other
medium.

If confidential information concerning recipients of psychosocial services is entered into
databases or systems of records available to persons whose access has not been
consented to by the recipient, healthcare workers use coding or other techniques to avoid
the inclusion of personal identifiers.

make plans in advance to facilitate the appropriate transfer and to protect the
confidentiality of records and data in the event of the HCW’s withdrawal from positions
or practice.

Waste disposal

Sound health care waste management ensures safety and minimal effects on health
care workers, the population and the environment.

A comprehensive system should include:

Waste generation and minimization

Separation and segregation of sources

Identification and classification of wastes

Handling and storage

Packaging and labelling

Transport on site and off site

Disposal of residues (including emissions)

Consideration of occupational, public and environmental health and safety

Stakeholder and community awareness and education

Research and development of improved technologies and environmentally friendly
practices.

There are various types of Waste that can be generated in offering psychosocial
healthcare services. These include:
General waste – non hazardous, poses no risk of injury or infection

Medical waste – material generated in a diagnosis, treatment, and/or immunization

Hazardous chemical waste – chemicals that are potentially toxic or poisonous

All the waste generated, irrespective of type, need to be effectively disposed. The
importance of proper effective waste disposal includes;

Minimizes spread of infection to health workers, patients and the local community

Reduced risk of accidental injury to those who handle the waste

Reduced likelihood of contamination of soil, ground water etc.

Reduces attraction of insects and rodents

Reduced odours

Guidelines for Disposal of Medical Waste include;

Use washable, leak-proof containers

Keep containers in convenient places

Empty containers daily or when three-quarters full

Never put hands into containers

Always dispose of medical waste correctly

Wear utility gloves and shoes

Wash the gloves and your hands afterward

Dispose off all sharps in puncture-resistant containers

Burn or bury the container of sharps
Figure 1.2 Colour coding for waste segregation




7.4.4 Learning Activities

7.4.4.1 Practical Activity

Task 1: Attend a home visit in your nearby health center and identify:

types of waste generated

Types of documents to keep

Ways of waste disposals

7.4.4.2 Self-Assessment

You are provided with the following questions for self -assessment, attempt them and
check your responses

Why do health care workers create, disseminate and dispose patients’ documents?
What colours are used in waste segregation?

Which documentations should be included in offering of psychosocial health care
services?

Who are some of the outsider readers who can help themselves to patients’ medical
records?

What guidelines can you use for disposal of medical waste?

7.4.4.3 Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials

The following resources are provided:

Stationery

Note book

Gloves

Water and soap

Sanitizer




7.4.5 References

https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/pbc.25725

https://www.nema.go.ke/images/Docs/Media%20centre/Publication/National%20Solid
%20Waste%20Management%20Strategy%20.pdf

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/255600967_Report_Writing_Process_princip
les_and_styles




Responses to the self-assessment questions
Why do health care workers create, disseminate and dispose patients’ documents?

facilitate provision of services later by them or by other professionals,

allow for replication of research design and analyses,

meet institutional requirements,

ensure accuracy of billing and payments, and

ensure compliance with law.

What colours are used in waste segregation?

Yellow, black and red

Which documentations should be included in offering of psychosocial health care
services?

reports of patient and/or family impact of illness, of assessments conducted, nature and
impact of psychosocial services provided, monitoring of illness status, and treatment
plans

Who are some of the outsider readers who can help themselves to patients’ medical
records?

•    Insurance companies ,

•    Surveyors ,

•    Ombudsmen,

•    Consultants,

•    Medicare intermediaries,

•    Authorized family members

What guidelines can you use for disposal of medical waste?
•    Use washable, leak-proof containers

•    Keep containers in convenient places

•    Empty containers daily or when three-quarters full

•    Never put hands into containers

•    Always dispose of medical waste correctly

•    Wear utility gloves and shoes

•    Wash the gloves and your hands afterward

•    Dispose off all sharps in puncture-resistant containers

•    Burn or bury the container of sharps




                                 CHAPTER EIGHT

EXECUTION OF PERI-OPERATIVE THEATRE SAFETY PRECAUTIONS


Unit of learning code- HE/OS/TT/CR/01/5/A
Related Unit of Competency in Occupational Standard;


Introduction to the unit of learning
This unit describes the competencies required to execute Perioperative Theatre safety
precautions. It involves wearing of personal protective Theatre protective gears,
verifying theatre checklist, patient care, proper handling of surgical instruments and
consumables as well as responding to alarms in an Operation Theatre, followed in the
context of theatre setting.
Summary of Learning Outcomes
    1. Plan and prepare for Operation Theatre safety
    2. Verify perioperative Theatre checklist
    3. Care for patient and theatre team
   4. Handle instruments, apparatus and consumables
   5. Respond to perioperative Theatre alarms
   6. Evaluate, wind-up Operation Theatre safety

  Learning Outcome 1: Plan and prepare for Operation Theatre safety


Introduction to the learning outcome
This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to plan for
Execution of Perioperative Theatre Safety Precautions. It includes Operation Theatre
protective gears, Use of perioperative Theatre protective gears, perioperative Theatre
safety precautions, Occupation health and safety in perioperative Theatre and
Perioperative Theatre Practice.


Performance Standard
   1. Protective gears are identified according to WHO standards
   2. Protective gears are used according to WHO standards


Information Sheet
Definition of terms
Protective gears- Types of equipment that is worn to increase an individual’s safety while
performing potentially hazardous tasks
Theatre Safety precautions- Measures taken or observed in theatre to ensure that
something with potential risk is safe
Laser (Light Amplification by the Stimulated Emission of Radiation) surgery- use of
special light beams in surgery instead of instruments for making incisions on tissue
Volatile- something, such as a gas or liquid, that easily evaporates in normal temperature.
Electrosurgery (diathermy)- use of electricity in surgery to cut or coagulate tissues


Operation theatre protective gears
These are clothing or equipment that protects the wearer from direct contact with
hazardous chemicals or potentially infectious body fluids. They may be worn for
purposes of self protection or to prevent cross-infection in theatre. They include:
disposable surgical caps, scrub trousers and tops, jackets, disposable shoe, surgical
shoes; surgical masks, gowns, gloves, masks, aprons and eye protection. Institutional
policies, national health guidelines and the World Health organization (WHO)
recommendations determine the type of protective gear to be worn in the operation
theatre. The type of gear to be worn may vary from one surgical procedure to the other
depending on the risk of exposure to body fluids and respiratory droplets. All surgical
practitioners in the operation theatre should take full responsibility over self and others
in order to ensure surgical attire compliance.


Use of perioperative Theatre protective gears
Clothing and Covering for clothing
These serve as part of contact precautions based on Infection prevention and control
(IPC) principles. Surgical scrubs should be worn as regular on-duty uniform in the
operation theatre. Fluid-resistant aprons or gowns should be worn on top to reduce the
likelihood of infected body fluids penetrating and contaminating the underlying clothes
where splashing of blood or fluids is anticipated.
Footwear
Floors and surfaces may be contaminated with feaces and body fluids.Foot wear also
provides optimal protection when floors are wet and rubber boots can protect against
sharps injuries. Foot wear includes boots, closed shoes that fully cover the dorsum of the
foot without laces, clogs. Shoe covers, preferably impermeable, should ideally be used
over closed shoes to facilitate decontamination in procedures with body fluid splashes.
Head cover
It protects the skin and hair of the head and neck from contamination and the possibility
of subsequent cross-infection. Hair and hair extensions need to fit inside the head cover.
Single-use head covers are preferred.
Mucous membrane protection
Mucous membranes include the eyes, mouth and nose. Face shield, goggles and face
masks should be used to completely cover them as an integral part of standard and
droplet precautions (IPC measures that aim to prevent infection with pathogens that can
be transmitted by large-particle droplets).
Face shields and goggles should not be used together, as this does not offer additional
protection and causes more discomfort and fogging affecting vision.
Goggles: Good seal with the skin of the face to protect the eyes from fluid splashes and
infectious droplets.
Face shield: Made of clear plastic and completely covers the sides and length of the
face. It protects the eyes, nose and mouth’s mucous membranes.
Surgical mask: It protects the nasal and oral mucosa from splashes and droplets of
infectious material.
Gloves
They prevent self and cross infection; and reduce risk from needle-stick injuries. Sterile
Surgical Gloves or High Level Disinfected Surgical Gloves should be worn during all
procedures in which the main aim is to avoid introduction of pathogens into the patient.
Single use examination gloves/ clean gloves should be worn for all procedures in which
one will be in contact with intact mucous membranes and where the primary purpose of
wearing gloves is to reduce the risk of being exposed to blood or other body fluids. The
best IPC practice dictates that gloves should be changed between patients.
Video link on Donning PPES in theatre
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=44eGL_dB4jk
Video link on Donning and Doffing of PPEs in surgical aerosal generating
procedures
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1M9lWuLzV28


Theatre Safety protective gears
Image Address: https://5.imimg.com/data5/TD/WW/PS/SELLER-19070031/products-
11.jpg



Theatre Gear
Image
:https://d3i71xaburhd42.cloudfront.net/e57f6d1334a3a9546c158b08573e30cd86104b4
4/4-Figure1-1.pn
Theatre protective clothing
  Image:https://cdn.shopify.com/s/files/1/0634/2173/files/Personal_protective_equipmen
  t_gloves_mask_hair_cover_cap_booties_apron_gown_face_shield_ef018467-9fc1-
  42f1-b470-d0a67145cd30_600x600.jpg?v=1558966802


  Perioperative theater safety precautions
  Protecting patients from injury is one of the major roles of the perioperative theatre
  technicians.
  The following are recommended practices for patient safety goals by the Joint
  Commission:-
        Improve the accuracy of patient identification
        Improve effectiveness of communication among caregivers
        Improve safety of using medications
        Reduce the risk of health care–associated infections
        Accurately and completely reconcile medications across continuum of care
        Reduce the risk of patient harm resulting from falls
        Reduce the risk of influenza and pneumococcal disease in institutionalized
         older adults
        Reduce the risk of surgical fires
        Implement applicable National Patient Safety Goals and associated
         requirements by components and practitioner sites
        Encourage patients’ active involvement in their own care as a patient safety
         strategy
        Prevent health care–associated pressure ulcers (decubitus ulcers)
        Identify safety risks inherent in the organization’s patient population
        Improve recognition and response to changes in a patient’s condition


  A perioperative theatre technologist has the responsibility of ensuring that the above
  goals are met, either directly or indirectly through collaboration with other health care
  members in order to maintain patient safety


Occupation health and safety in perioperative Theatre
  During an operation health and safety procedures affect all those present including: the
  patient; the surgeon and the surgeon’s assistants; the anaesthetist; nursing staff and
  theatre practitioners; health care assistants; any visitors to the theatre such as students
and medical representatives. The following are health and safety issues specific to
theatres:-
Special consideration must be given to patients under general anaesthetic, as they are
unable to take care of their own safety needs or voice any concerns.
Pressure area care is a fundamental skill in the operation theatre because immobility
which could be resulting from factors such as use of anesthetic agents or tissue incisions
pose an additional risk factor to this.
Staff must ensure that visitors to theatres receive instruction in health and safety
procedures.
To ensure efficient and safe running of the theatre list, it should be managed by a
designated person, usually the most senior. There should be sufficient staff on duty, and
they should all have a clear understanding of their role in the team, based on their skills
and abilities
All equipment should be tested before it is needed, and care should be taken with
electrical equipment so that cables do not present a trip hazard or run across areas where
there is a risk of fluids pooling. The heating should be set at a level that is safe and
comfortable for patients and staff
A meticulous theatre-cleaning regime is fundamental to preventing infection. Theatres
should be clean and dust free, ventilation systems must be in working order and doors
must be kept closed.
The theatre floor should be cleaned thoroughly every day, and floors and surfaces should
be damp-dusted between operations, ensuring any spillage of blood or body fluids is
removed . A cleaning agent of proven activity should be used, cloths should be
disposable and mop heads should be sterilised daily.
Although wearing gloves does not prevent accidental needlestick injuries, the DoH
(1998b) suggests that they help reduce the volume of blood to which the wearer is
exposed. Clean gloves should be put on by circulating staff before touching patients or
any equipment, specimens, or drapes that could be contaminated.
Safety in use of specialist equipment
Electrosurgery (diathermy)
The patient’s skin should be evaluated before and after diathermy use.
The patient should not be in contact with grounded metal objects as the provision of an
alternative pathway for the electrical current could result in a burn.
Any metal parts of the operating table that could come into contact with the patient
should therefore be padded and jewellery and piercings should be removed before arrival
in theatre.
The return electrode should be placed over a vascular, muscular area to promote
electrical conductivity and to dissipate heat.
Shaving may be necessary as hair at the dispersive site prevents complete plate contact
with skin.
The plate should not be placed over bony prominences (this can impede return current),
over implanted prostheses (there is a potential for overheating), over scar tissue or over
areas distal to tourniquets where adequate tissue perfusion cannot be guaranteed.
Laser surgery
When lasers are in use theatre staff should wear eye protection, doors should be locked
and windows covered to protect those outside the theatre (Kitching and Edge, 2003).
X-rays
In accordance with the Ionising Radiation Regulations 1999, staff who work with
ionising radiation should limit exposure to no more than is reasonably necessary, and
should exercise reasonable care while carrying out such work.
Every employee who works with ionising radiation should make full and proper use of
the protective equipment provided.
The number of people present in theatre should be limited to those necessary for the
procedure and those present must wear lead aprons.
It is advisable for pregnant women to avoid X-rays because radiation may cause foetal
abnormalities (Smith, 2000).
Hazards from volatile liquids or gases
 avoid the use of flammable solutions with diathermy as there is the risk of ignition.
Anyone affected should leave the theatre immediately.
Soft contact lenses should be removed when methyl methacrylate is being mixed as they
are permeable to irritant vapours.
Gas cylinders used in theatre must be clearly labelled with the name or chemical symbol
of the gas on the shoulder of the cylinder and the valve.
They should be stored in a cool, well-ventilated room, free from flammable materials.
No lubricant of any description should be used on the cylinder valves.


1.2.1.4 Learning Activities
  1.2.1.5.1 Case study
  You are working as a circulator during surgery when you notice that the surgeon has a
  hole in his glove. You inform him and he responds that you should not worry about it.
  What will be your response?
  1.2.1.5.2 Field Visit to Theatre
  Objectives of the visit
  To identify protective gears according to WHO standards
  To use protective gears according to WHO standards


Self-Assessment
  You are provided with the following questions for self -assessment, attempt them
  and check your responses
  What are three (3) PPEs worn for protection of mucous membranes?
  Perioperative Theatre precautions are paramount in ensuring patient safety. Explain
  five(5) recommended practices for patient safety goals by the Joint Commission that are
  directly specific to theatre environment?
  Describe five(5) specific interventions that you will make to ensure safety in use of a
  surgical diathermy
  What are three (3) interventions you will make to prevent hazards from volatile gases in
  theatre?
  What is the difference between use of sterile gloves and examination gloves?
  What is the responsibility of a theatre technologist in ensuring occupation health safety?
  Efficient measures in infection prevention and control require that theatre personnel don
  and doff PPEs correctly. Explain the right procedure for closed gloving Explain the right
  procedure for closed gloving after donning a sterile gown
  Describe the procedure for gowning after a surgical hand scrub


  Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials
        Medical PPE: Sterile surgical gloves, n95 mask, surgical mask, surgical caps,
         theatre scrub gown, surgical boots
        Posters on wearing and removal of PPE
        Running water
        Antiseptic solutions
        Hand washing soap
      Hand towels




References
Lumbley, J. L., Ali, S. A., & Tchokouani, L. S. (2014). Retrospective review of
predisposing factors for intraoperative pressure ulcer development. Journal of clinical
anesthesia, 26(5), 368-374.https://ehs.princeton.edu/book/export/html/335
von Vogelsang, A. C., Swenne, C. L., Gustafsson, B. Å., & Falk Brynhildsen, K. (2020).
Operating theatre nurse specialist competence to ensure patient safety in the operating
theatre: A discursive paper. Nursing Open, 7(2), 495-502.
Joanna Kotcher Fuller. (2013). Surgical Technology: Principles And Practice. 6th ed. St.
Louis, Mo.: Elsevier.
AORN. (2007). Association of PeriOperative Registered Nurses (AORN) standards,
recommended practice, and guidelines. Denver: Author.
Joint Commission. (2008). 2009 National patient safety goals. Available at:
www.jointcommission.org/PatientSafety/NationalPatientSafetyGoals


RESPONSES
What are three (3) PPEs worn for protection of mucous membranes?
Goggles
Surgical mask
Face shield
Perioperative Theatre precautions are paramount in ensuring patient safety. What are
five(5) recommended practices for patient safety goals by the Joint Commission that are
directly specific to theatre environment?
Improve the accuracy of patient identification
Improve effectiveness of communication among caregivers
Improve safety of using medications
Reduce the risk of health care–associated infections
Accurately and completely reconcile medications across continuum of care
Reduce the risk of patient harm resulting from falls
Reduce the risk of influenza and pneumococcal disease in institutionalized older adults
Reduce the risk of surgical fires
Implement applicable National Patient Safety Goals and associated requirements by
components and practitioner sites
Encourage patients’ active involvement in their own care as a patient safety strategy
Prevent health care–associated pressure ulcers (decubitus ulcers)
Identify safety risks inherent in the organization’s patient population
Improve recognition and response to changes in a patient’s condition
What are five(5) specific interventions that you will make to ensure safety in use of a
surgical diathermy?
The patient’s skin should be evaluated before and after diathermy use.
The patient should not be in contact with grounded metal objects as the provision of an
alternative pathway for the electrical current could result in a burn.
Any metal parts of the operating table that could come into contact with the patient
should therefore be padded and jewellery and piercings should be removed before arrival
in theatre.
The return electrode should be placed over a vascular, muscular area to promote
electrical conductivity and to dissipate heat.
Shaving may be necessary as hair at the dispersive site prevents complete plate contact
with skin.
The plate should not be placed over bony prominences (this can impede return current),
over implanted prostheses (there is a potential for overheating), over scar tissue or over
areas distal to tourniquets where adequate tissue perfusion cannot be guaranteed.
What are three (3) interventions you will prevent hazards from volatile gases in theatre?
avoid the use of flammable solutions with diathermy as there is the risk of ignition.
Anyone affected should leave the theatre immediately.
Soft contact lenses should be removed when methyl methacrylate is being mixed as they
are permeable to irritant vapours.
Gas cylinders used in theatre must be clearly labelled with the name or chemical symbol
of the gas on the shoulder of the cylinder and the valve.
They should be stored in a cool, well-ventilated room, free from flammable materials.
No lubricant of any description should be used on the cylinder valves
What is the difference between use of sterile gloves and examination gloves?
Sterile gloves are manufactured to meet the Food and Drugs Administration (FDA)
standards for sterilization techniques while examination gloves are not sterilized by the
manufacturer
Sterile gloves are used for invasive/ surgical procedures while examination gloves are
used for non- sterile procedures
Surgical gloves have a lower acceptable quality level of pinholes (AQL) than
examination gloves
Efficient measures in infection prevention and control require that theatre personnel don
and doff PPEs correctly. Explain the right procedure for closed gloving after donning a
sterile gown
maneuver sterile gloves onto your hands with your hands hidden from view under the
gown’s cuffs.
Fold the glove wrapper so that the side edges come together at the middle. The gloves
are oriented in the wrapper with the fingers up and the cuffed (wrist) part at the bottom
edge of the wrapper.
Fold the upper and lower edges of the wrapper inward.
To open the wrapper, grasp the two center edges and open them outward to expose the
gloves. To keep the edges from closing up again, evert them slightly; this will remove
some of the memory in the folds.
Position the left hand with the palm facing upward, as if you are about to receive an
object in your hand. Pick up the glove with your right hand shielded by the gown and
place the glove, palm to palm and cuff to cuff, over the left hand. The glove is oriented
correctly if the glove fingers point to your elbow.
Working inside the gown cuff, grasp the under edge of the glove cuff between your left
thumb and fingers. Using your protected right hand, grasp the upper edge of the glove
cuff. The palm of the glove should still be oriented to your palm.
Keep the hidden fingers within 1 inch (2.5 cm) of the outside edge of the knitted cuff,
and make sure your thumb is well inside the seam of the cuff.
Pull the glove on. Grasp the left glove cuff and advance your left hand into the glove.
Repeat with the other hand. After gloving, check both hands for any sign of punctures
or tears. If a defect is apparent, the circulator removes the glove, and gloving is repeated
on that hand.
What is the responsibility of a theatre technologist in ensuring occupation health safety?
  Ensure their own safety and health and that of persons who may be affected by their act
  of commission or omission.
  Cooperate with the employer and co-workers in their workplace to ach safe and healthy
  work environment by following OSH policy guidelines and standard operating
  procedures
  Make themselves familiar with the OSH policy guidelines
  Use PPE as provided by employer to prevent risk to his/her safety and health
  Comply with safety and health Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs)
  Report to the supervisor of possible hazards
  Report to supervisor on any accidents, injuries, or near misses that arise in the work place
  by completing the appropriate form.
  If an urgent action is required, the situation must be reported and information forwarded
  to the appropriate department as soon as possible (24 hours). Report any serious and fatal
  accidents within 8 hours.
  Facilitate the performance of duties given by the employer
  Inform the supervisor of any personal condition that may increase vulnerability of
  occupational hazards
  Describe the procedure for gowning after a surgical hand scrub
  After drying the hands and arms, grasp the gown just below the neckline and lift it up
  and away from the table, without touching anything else with bare hands. Remember,
  the inside surface of the gown faces inward, toward you.
  Step away from the table and allow the gown to unfold in front of you. Do not touch the
  (outside) surface facing away from you.
  Being careful not to lower the gown, look for the armholes and place your hands and
  arms inside the sleeves. Advance your hands, pushing them through to within about 1
  inch (2.5 cm) of the knitted cuff edge. Do not allow the fingertips to extend beyond the
  knitted cuff and sleeve. Avoid raising your arms as you push them through the sleeves.
  At this point the circulator may secure the neck and inside ties. The circulator assists in
  securing the gown’s back wrap (discussed next). Keep hands well inside the gown cuff
  and proceed to glove using the closed technique



Learning Outcome 2 Verify perioperative Theatre checklist
  Introduction to the learning outcome
This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to plan for
Execution of Perioperative Theatre Safety Precautions. It includes Various Perioperative
Theatre checklists and their contents, identification and verification of Perioperative
Theatre checklists, record keeping and operation Theatre Practice.


Performance Standard
 1. Perioperative checklist is identified according to the workplace unit
 2. Perioperative checklist is verified according to Standard Operation Procedures and
     WHO


Information Sheet
Definition of terms
Checklist- list of required items or actions to be made before proceeding to a procedure
Surgical safety checklist - a tool that is designed to improve the safety of surgical
procedures by ensuring that key members of a surgical operation perform key safety
checks during the vital phases of perioperative care.
Various Peri-operative Theatre checklists and their contents
According to WHO safe surgery programme, unsafe surgical care can cause substantial
harm. Perioperative theatre checklists are a core component of the set standards for
theatre safety. Various types of theatre checklists include the WHO surgical safety
checklist, checklist for starting the skin preparation and preoperative checklist.
Preoperative checklist
This contains critical elements that must be obtained and verified preoperatively. It is
completed by the nurse, usually in the ward or outpatient department, and it accompanies
a patient to the operation theatre. Hospitals and other surgical facilities have individual
check-in protocols. However, specific details are always verified:
1. Patient identity is meticulously checked- health care provider asks the patient his or
her name and verifies this with the patient’s unique identifiers, the surgery schedule, and
the medical records at hand.
2. Correct procedure, side, and site are validated with the patient, the medical record, the
surgical schedule, and the consent form. Preoperative procedures include the surgeon’s
skin markings on the operative side showing the location of the incision. These are
matched with all other information available.
3. Surgical and anesthesia consent forms must be signed according to facility protocol.
4. Resuscitation orders and any other legal documents are checked.
5. Patient allergies must be noted on all medical records, and the patient is asked about
allergies again in the holding area.
6. Preoperative medications are documented in the patient’s medical and preoperative
records. Any medication ordered but not yet given may be administered in the holding
area as directed by the surgeon or ACP.
7. Prostheses, including dentures and hearing aids, must be removed before surgery
whenever possible. In the event a prosthesis is removed in the holding area, extreme care
is
taken to protect it from loss or misidentification.
8. Jewelry, including body-piercing jewelry, is removed before anesthesia or any
procedure in which electrosurgery is used. Any jewelry removed in the holding area is
placed in a container, labeled, and placed in a secure location until it can be safely
returned to the patient. A wedding ring may be taped in place.
9. Medical records accompanying the patient are noted. Diagnostic results
accompanying the patient, such as radiographs or other imaging studies, are clearly
labeled.
Example of perioperative checklist.
Patient’s name: ______________________________ Date: _________________
Height: _____________ Weight: ___________
Identifification                                band                             present:
______________________________________________________________________
______________
2. Informed consent signed: ___________________ Special permits signed:
______________________________________________
3.     Surgical    site:    _______________________________(Ex:            Sterilization):
_______________________________________________
4. History & physical examination report present: _________________________ Date:
_______________________________________
5.                                     Laboratory                                records
present:_______________________________________________________________
_______________________
CBC:       ___________________           Hgb:       ____________________      Urinalysis:
_____________________ Hct: __________________
6. Item Present Removed
Natural teeth _________________ _________________
Dentures; upper, lower, partial _________________ _________________
Bridge _________________ _________________
Contact lenses _________________ _________________
Other prostheses—type: _____________ _________________ _________________
Jewelry:
Wedding band (taped/tied) _________________ _________________
Rings _________________ _________________
Earrings: pierced, clip-on _________________ _________________
Neck chains _________________ _________________
Any other body piercings _________________ _________________
Make-up _________________ _________________
Nail polish _________________ _________________
7. Clothing
a. Clean patient gown _________________ ________________
b. Cap _________________ _________________
c. Sanitary pad, etc. _________________ _________________
8.            Family            instructed             where        to            wait?
______________________________________________________________________
___________
9.                                   Valuables                                 secured?
______________________________________________________________________
_____________________
10. Blood available? _________________ Ordered? _____________ Where?
______________________________________________
11.                    Anesthetist                 medication                    given:
______________________________________________________________________
__________
Type: _____________________ Time: _________________
12.   Voided:    __________________          Amount:     ___________________     Time:
____________________ Catheter: ___________________
13. Mouth care given: ____________________________
14. Vital signs: Temperature: _______________ Pulse: ______________ Resp:
_______________ Blood Pressure: ___________
15.      Special       problems/precautions:        (Allergies,      deafness,      etc.):
_____________________________________________________________
16.                Area                of                skin                preparation:
______________________________________________________________________
_________________
17.    ________________________________________________________________
Date: _________________ Time:_______________
Signature: Nurse releasing patient


WHO surgical safety checklist
Research suggests use of a surgical safety checklist reduces morbidity and mortality
(Haynes, Weiser, Berry, et al., 2009). It is used prior to induction of anesthesia, before
the skin incision is made, and before the patient leaves the OR.It is important to review
the patient’s record for the following: Correct informed surgical consent, with patient’s
signature, completed records for health history and physical examination, results of
diagnostic studies and allergies (including latex). It is a 19-item checklist that was
developed in consultation with various stakeholders with an aim of increasing team work
and communication; and decreasing adverse events and errors in surgery.
Redrawn                                                                      from:
https://www.who.int/patientsafety/safesurgery/sssl_checklist_front-thumb.gif
Video link to use of WHO surgical safety checklist: https://youtu.be/CsNpfMldtyk
Checklist for starting skin preparation
This should be done before skin incision and it may be done by a theatre technician
depending on institution policy. It includes the following:-
Prepare the patient.
Have you checked the patient’s record for allergies?
Has the patient been positioned properly?
Has the surgical site been verified?
Has all jewelry been removed?
Has the anesthesia care provider given permission to start the prep?
Are the surgeons present and available to start surgery?
Prepare the supplies.
Note which items are not included in the prep kit.
Are sterile gloves available?
Have the prep solutions been poured?
Is the prep table positioned close to the patient?
Is a receptacle at hand for soiled prep sponges?
Do you have adequate light on the prep area?
Prepare yourself.
Do you have a plan?
Do you know the exact boundaries of the prep area?
Is your clothing contained so that it does not touch the prep area? (A loose warm-up
jacket or baggy sleeves may drag across the prep area.)
Identification and verification of Perioperative Theatre checklists
A perioperative theatre technologist should collaborate with the nurse in check listing
the patient for surgery as provided for in the scope of practice and medical legal ethics.
In the operation room, the perioperative checklist that is escorting the patient to theatre
should be counter-checked by the receiving personnel. Following admission in theatre,
the WHO surgical safety checklist and the skin preparation checklist should be checked
before the operation is started. Other checklists should be reviewed according to
institutional policies.



Record keeping and operation Theatre Practice
Documentation is the means of making a permanent legal record of the patient’s
interaction with health care providers and services. It is a way for health professionals to
communicate       patient   procedures,     diagnoses,     treatments,    condition,    and
recommendations for care. Separate forms are required for many different types of
documentation, but the method of documentation is consistent among health care
facilities. The importance of correct documentation cannot be overstated. A mistake in
documentation can lead to serious medical errors. Different registers used in operation
theatre include the following:-
Instrument register- It mentions the total number of instrument sets used in a single day
Linen stock register- It details the linen type and quantity that the OT has.
Complaint/incident register- it records all the unusual incidences and complaints in the
OT.
Microbiology register- it maintains a record of microbiology reports for various samples
taken.
Water analysis register- it maintains the results for microbiological tests on water
samples from various areas of the OT like scrub room and sterilization room.
Daily register- It details the infection control activities of OT as follows: Name of the
concerned cleaning staff on duty, assessment of temperature control, samples sent from
the OT for microbiological tests, biomedical waste management, fumigation details of
the OT with the name of chemical reagent used.
Operation register- it records all the surgical procedures done in the operation room.it
records all the information and particulars of the patient to include the patient’s full
name, age, sex, registration number, ward in which the patient is admitted , full
description of the surgery performed, name of anesthesiologist, name of the operating
surgeon and assistant, anesthetic agent used for anesthesia, name of the scrub nurses,
name of the OT assistant, operation theater table on which the patient was operated,
whether the procedure was a major or minor surgery and the duration of the operation.
Sterilization registers- it includes the following details: number of instrument sets along
with the method of sterilization, the total time taken for sterilization along with its
starting and ending time, the staff responsible for sterilization.
Temperature and humidity control register- it includes the checked temperature whose
recording is done every two hours.
Central sterile supply department (CSSD) register- it mentions the details of the quantity
of linen sent for sterilization and received after the sterilization procedure is over.
Link     to   further    details   on     medical     records    in    operation     theatre:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/325855465_Operation_Theater_List_and_Re
cord_Maintenance
The following general guidelines should be followed for health care documentation (to
include the perioperative theatre practice documentation):
1. Every document must contain the patient’s unique identifiers, including patient name,
hospital or identity card number, and other information required specifically for that
health facility.
2. The date must be accurate. Never predate or postdate a document. Always document
the correct time.
3. If you make an error in handwritten documentation, make a single line through the
part that is incorrect and write in the correct information. Initial the change. Never use
opaque liquids or tapes to blank out the error—it must remain in the record.
If the documentation is performed in writing, make sure it is legible.
Documents must be kept clean and dry to prevent smearing. It is good practice to
document away from areas where spills or splashes can occur.


Learning Activities
Case study
You are participating in check-listing of a patient during the sign-out time when you
realize that an operation has been performed on the wrong patient. What will be your
immediate response?


Field Visit to Theatre
Objectives of the visit
To identify the perioperative checklist according to the workplace unit
To verify the perioperative checklist according to Standard Operation Procedures and
WHO
Self-Assessment
You are provided with the following questions for self -assessment, attempt them
and check your responses
What is a surgical safety checklist?
What are five specific details that must be verified in theatre checklists?
Documentation and record keeping serves many functions in operation theatre to include
fulfilling the medical-legal requirements. What details should be included in an
operation register?
What are five general guidelines that should be followed for health care documentation?
What should be confirmed on a theatre safety checklist during sign-in?
What are the components of a safety checklist during sign out?
Skin preparation checklist is a requirement before initiation of an operation. What are
the components of patient preparation in this checklist?
A daily operation theatre register details the infection control activities of OT. What are
common components of this register?
Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials
Sample surgical safety checklist
Institutional preoperation checklist
skin preparation checklists
Sterile surgical gloves
Theatre records to include operation registers, daily register, sterilization register,
temperature and humidity control register, microbiology register, water analysis and
culture register, instrument register, central sterile supply department register(CSSD),
linen stock register, complaints register.
References
Phillips, N. (2007). Berry and Kohn’s operating room technique (11th ed.). St.
Louis: Mosby
University of Washington School of Medicine: Informed consent: ethics
in medicine. Accessed December 8, 2011, at http://depts.washington.edu/
bioethx.
Haynes, A. B., Weiser, T. G., Berry, W. R., et al. (2009). A surgical safety check
list to reduce morbidity and mortality in a global population. The New England Journal
of Medicine 360(5), 491–499
Padhy, Srikant Kumar. (2018). Operation Theater List and Record Maintenance.


RESPONSES
What is a surgical safety checklist?
A surgical safety checklist is a tool that is designed to improve the safety of surgical
procedures by ensuring that key members of a surgical operation perform key safety
checks during the vital phases of perioperative care.
What are five specific details that must be verified in theatre checklists?
Patient identity
Correct procedure
Surgical and anesthesia consent forms- signed according to facility protocol.
Resuscitation orders and any other legal documents
Patient allergies
Preoperative medications
Prostheses
Jewelry
Medical records accompanying the patient
Documentation and record keeping serves many functions in operation theatre to include
fulfilling the medical-legaal requirements. What details should be included in an
operation register?
all the surgical procedures done in the operation room.
all the information and particulars of the patient to include the patient’s full name, age,
sex, registration number, ward in which the patient is admitted
full description of the surgery performed
name of anesthesiologist
name of the operating surgeon and assistant
anesthetic agent used for anesthesia
name of the scrub nurses and the OT assistant
operation theater table on which the patient was operated
whether the procedure was a major or minor surgery and the duration of the operation.
What are five general guidelines that should be followed for health care documentation?
Every document must contain the patient’s unique identifiers, including patient name,
hospital or identity card number, and other information required specifically for that
health facility.
The date must be accurate. Never predate or postdate a document. Always document the
correct time.
If you make an error in handwritten documentation, make a single line through the part
that is incorrect and write in the correct information. Initial the change. Never use
opaque liquids or tapes to blank out the error—it must remain in the record.
If the documentation is performed in writing, make sure it is legible.
Documents must be kept clean and dry to prevent smearing.
What should be confirmed on a theatre safety checklist during sign-in?
Confirm the patient identity, procedure and site to be operated
Patient allergies
Difficulty airway or aspiration risk
Risk of blood loss
Anesthesia safety completed
Briefing all members of surgical team on care of patient or any concerns
What are the components of a safety checklist during sign out?
Confirm name of operative procedure
Instrument count
Specimen identified and labelled
Any equipment problem to be addressed
Skin preparation checklist is a requirement before initiation of an operation. What are
the components of patient preparation in this checklist?
Have you checked the patient’s record for allergies?
Has the patient been positioned properly?
Has the surgical site been verified?
Has all jewelry been removed?
Has the anesthesia care provider given permission to start the prep?
Are the surgeons present and available to start surgery?
A daily operation theatre register details the infection control activities of OT. What are
common components of this register?
Name of the concerned cleaning staff on duty
assessment of temperature control
samples sent from the OT for microbiological tests
biomedical waste management
fumigation details of the OT with the name of chemical reagent used

  Learning Outcome 3 Care for patient and theatre team


Introduction to the learning outcome
This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to plan for
Execution of Perioperative Theatre Safety Precautions. It includes Identification of
patients, Operation Theatre team, Team work, Transferring patient to the operation table,
Basic nursing skills, Basic life support, Positioners and Positioning of patient on
operation table, Making drills and evacuation and Operation Theatre Practice


Performance Standard
   1. Patient is identified according to procedure to be performed; IP. No, file and
       identification band
   2. Completeness of theatre team is checked according to WHO standards
   3. Patient is transferred to the operation table according to SOPs
   4. Patient is positioned according to procedure to be performed
   5. Positioners are strapped onto the patient as per SOPs
   6. Patient is transferred to PT trolley as per SOPs
   7. Drills and Evacuation procedure is carried out according to OSH Act

1.2.3.3 Information Sheet
Definition of terms
Team work- combined group work directed at efficiently performing a given task
Basic life support-Basic life support (BLS) includes recognition of signs of sudden
cardiac arrest (SCA), heart attack, stroke, and foreign-body airway obstruction (FBAO);
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR); and defibrillation with an automated external
defibrillator (American Heart Association (AHA), 2010).
Positioners- a device used by the surgical team members to allign the patient’s boby for
a given surgical procedure
Fire drill- method of practicing how a building would be evacuated in the event of
a fire or other emergencies
Identification of patients
Use of a standard process to verify patient identification, the surgical procedure, and the
surgical site is imperative to maximize patient safety (World Health Organization, 2008).
This allows for prompt intervention if any discrepancies are identified.
The identity of the patient is verified before transporting and before any procedure.
Patient identification is a critical issue in health care. The perioperative theatre
technologist is responsible for patient identification according to facility policy and the
mutual guidelines agreed on by all professional surgical organizations. No patient should
be transported and no procedure should be initiated until the protocol for identification
has been completed, even if the patient is known to the health care staff.
All patients are identified in at least three ways. The patient’s wrist or ankle band is
imprinted with the patient’s name and other unique identifiers such as birth date and
hospital number. If a scan or imprint card system is used, the patient’s identification card
is used to process all paperwork and matches the patient’s identification bracelet. This
card must be firmly attached to the chart during transport and must remain with the chart
until the patient returns to his or her hospital unit. The patient’s chart must accompany
the patient whenever the individual is transported from the unit.
To validate the patient’s identity, follow these guidelines:
1. Examine the patient’s identity band. Compare both the name and the number with
those on the patient’s chart.
2. Ask the patient to state his or her full name and date of birth. Do not call the patient
by name before asking the patient to state his or her name.
3. Ask the patient to tell you what procedure he or she is undergoing and to point to the
side on which the surgery will take place.
4. If the patient does not speak English, or seems to have difficulty understanding, you
must seek assistance from an interpreter. This information can be determined ahead of
time so that an appropriate interpreter is available.
5. Remember that patients may be anxious or worried before surgery and might answer
closed-ended questions indiscriminately. It is necessary to question the patient without
giving the answer.
6. Always check the chart, the identification band, and hospital ID number for each
patient.


Operation Theatre Team
The surgical team consists of the patient, the anesthesiologist or anesthetist, the surgeon,
nurses, and the surgical technologists (or assistants). They have unique roles during an
operation as outlined below:-
The anesthesiologist or anesthetist administers the anesthetic agent and monitors the
patient’s physical status throughout the surgery.
Surgical assistants scrub and perform the surgery. The person in the scrub role, either a
nurse or a theatre technologist, provides sterile instruments and supplies to the surgeon
during the procedure.
The circulating nurse coordinates the care of the patient in the Operation room (OR).
Care provided by the circulating nurse includes assisting with patient positioning,
preparing the patient’s skin for surgery, managing surgical specimens, anticipating the
needs of the surgical team, and documenting intraoperative events.
The surgeon- participates as both a sterile and nonsterile team member. At the start of
the case, the surgeon performs sterile techniques to place the trocars. He or she then
breaks scrub to operate from the surgeon’s console. The surgeon returns to the sterile
field (after scrubbing, regowning, and gloving) near the close of the procedure to remove
the trocars and close the incisions. The surgeon directs the flow of the procedure and is
responsible for coordinating the activities of everyone on the team.
The patient


Team work
A team is a group of people who come together to reach a common goal or set of goals.
The surgical team is only one type of team that plans and implements patient care in the
operating room. In some large hospitals, certain personnel work within a surgical
specialty, such as cardiology or orthopedics. In this type of structure, surgical
technologists work with their peers to design instrument sets, order equipment, and
update the surgeons’ procedural changes. The team may or may not have a team leader.
The surgical team includes the surgeons, anesthesia provider, assistants, surgical
technologist, and registered nurse. They all work together on a single procedure.
Communication usually is focused, task oriented, and at times intense.
Characteristics of good teamwork
Good teamwork is the result of healthy relationships within the team. This does not mean
that conflicts do not arise. Conflict in groups is normal, because people have different
ideas, problem-solving skills, values, and beliefs. The qualities of a good team reflect
how conflict is managed and include:-
Yielding - This does not mean giving up one’s values or beliefs. It means accepting the
fact that others have valid points of view and conceding when one has made incorrect
assumptions or conclusions.
Change - One of the purposes of a team is to adjust to a changing environment, such as
unfolding events during a surgical procedure, a change in instrumentation, or new
responsibilities. Team members must identify new tasks or procedures and implement
them with as little disruption as possible.
Politeness - This manner in which people speak to and behave toward each other. The
attributes of acceptable behavior include respect, gratitude, and acceptance.
Collaboration- This is working together for a common purpose. In the operating room,
personnel contribute their skills, time, and energy to the care of the surgical patient.
Transferring patient to the operation table
Before the patient is transferred to the operation room, the following should be verified:
Patient identity, procedure to be performed and a signed consent form. The following
factors determine whether a patient can ambulate to the operation bed, use a wheelchair
or a stretcher: Presence of invasive devices, state of the patient, planned procedure and
the institutional policy.
Stretchers should have side rails and lock mechanisms and the head should elevate to
alter the patients comfort and position. The side rails are kept up and safety strap secured
during transport. The staff member who is close to the proximity of the patient’s airway
should push the stretcher. In collaboration with a nurse, you should assess the patient’s
condition to determine whether special equipment like an ICU bed are required during
transport.
Once sufficient staff members are present, the stretcher/bed is wheeled close to the
operation table, the wheels of both the operation bed and the stretcher/bed locked and
the side rail that is proximal to the operation bed lowered. Invasive lines and devices are
made visible and kept free from entanglement. Some team members stand at the far end
of the operation table; others on the proximal end and use appropriate body mechanisms
to prevent injury to self during transferring of the patient. A roller or a transfer sheet is
used to transfer a patient if they are not mobile and invasive devices supported in place
to prevent entanglement.


Basic Nursing skills
It is important to be competent in the following procedures because they are vital
suring patient positioning:
Observation of vital signs
These include Blood Pressure; Temperature; Pulse and Respiration. They help in
determining the most appropriate positions for a patient. For example, a patient with
hypotension or bradypnea may not be positioned in reverse tredelenburg position.
Bed making procedures
Video link to bed making procedures: https://notesread.com/bed-making-procedure-in-
nursing/
Body mechanics in bed making
When bending, bend your knees, not your back in order to keep the center of gravity
above and close to the base of support and help prevent fatigue
Face your entire body in the direction that you are moving to avoid twisting in order to
prevent strain or injury
Organize your work. Conserve your steps by making a few trips around the bed as
possible


Appliances used in bed making
Mackintosh- Water proof material used to protect the bottom sheets, pillows and mattress
from getting wet
Bed Rest/Back Rest- Helps the patient sit in upright position. May be attached to or
separate from the bed and can be adjusted to different degrees
Fracture Boards- They are boards (wooden) placed under the mattress to provide a firm
rigid foundation to the bed and prevent the mattress from sagging. Aid in immobilization
on affected part of the body.
Bed Cradle- Appliance used to keep the weight of the linen off the patient e.g. in patient
with burns to protect linen from touching the area with wound
Sand Bags- Small bags made of impermeable material filled with sand. They are used to
support patients legs to prevent foot drop. May also be used to immobilize a fractured
limb
Bed Blocks- Made of wood and used to raise the bed on one side e.g. to supply blood to
vital organs like the brain
Air Rings -Rubber ring placed beneath the patient’s buttocks to keep them from direct
contact with the bed. Relieve pressure hence prevent pressure sores.
Bed Tables- Specially made tables which can be drawn up in front of the patient and may
be used during meals or for leaning slightly forward incase the patient has difficulty in
breathing
Hot Water Bottles- Bottles of rubber used to give warmth to the patient. They may also
be used to relieve pain
Foot Boards- Used to secure and support the patients foot
Water Beds- They are just like mattress though have a place to fill with hot water
Air Beds- These are mattresses that are filled with air
Ripple Mattresses- Have segments and uses electricity to put air pressure. Used to relieve
pressure
Basic life support
Knowledge and certification in Cardiopulmonary rescucitation (CPR) is paramount in
ensuring that health care staff are able to respond in case of a cardiac or respiratory arrest.
The goal of CPR is to support and restore oxygenation, ventilation, and circulation.
Restoration of intact neurological function accompanies this process. Return of
spontaneous circulation is accomplished with basic life support (BLS) or advanced
cardiac life support
(ACLS) measures. A perioperative theatre technologist should possess knowledge and
skills in BLS as learnt in the unit of competency “ Provide First Aid Services”. He or
she should also be able to assess for signs of Cardiopulmonaty arrest which may include
nausea, shortness of breath, chest pain or pressure, pain radiating from the jaw, neck, or
Shoulder and cardiac dysrhythmias.
Positioners and Positioning of patient on operation table
The surgical patient is positioned on the operating table for a specific surgical procedure:
To allow optimum access to the operative site
To reduce adverse physiological effects and prevent injury during surgery
To permit optimum access for anesthesia care (includes access to venous and arterial
sites, airway, and monitoring sites)
The following elements are important in the safe positioning of patients:
Positioning - Each patient is unique and has specific considerations, such as age, joint
mobility, and disease. Because of the high risk of serious and permanent injury, the
surgical team must be guided and directed in the positioning process. The anesthesia care
provider, surgeon, and circulator draw this direction from their knowledge of the
patient’s status.
Planning- All necessary equipment must be assembled ahead of time. Pads, positioning
devices, table accessories, and transfer devices must be on hand before positioning
begins. Bariatric/ obese table extensions or special tables must be on hand before the
patient arrives in the surgical suite. Adequate personnel must be available to complete
the task safely.
Teamwork- Teamwork is needed to create smooth, step by-step coordination.
Theatre technologists have specific responsibilities during patient positioning as outlined
below:
Understand common positions and the surgeries for which these positions are used
Know ahead of time the position that will be used for each assigned surgical procedure
Proactively prevent accident and injury during positioning
Question any aspect of the patient’s position that appears to have risk potential
Remain alert and focused on patient safety
Communicate clearly with other members of the team
Principles of safe positioning
All equipment needed for positioning must be assembled and prepared for use before the
patient is brought into the room.
Adequate personnel must be available to assist before positioning begins. Do not risk the
patient’s safety because of a crowded surgical schedule.
Before positioning begins, all team members should be familiar with the position and
each person must understand his or her role in positioning
The patient should not be moved except on the instructions of the person directing the
move.
Although everyone involved is responsible for the patient’s safety, one person—usually
the surgeon, anesthesia care provider, or surgical assistant—guides and directs the
others.
In general, the anesthesia care provider must give permission before any change is made
in a patient’s position because these can cause physiological alterations such as a drop
in blood pressure.
Always check equipment before using it. Tighten the locking devices of all weight-
bearing accessories.
Make sure the table is locked securely in position and do not assume that any accessory
equipment is in working order.
Move slowly when positioning the patient.
Always move the body within its normal range of motion. This requires knowledge of
joint types and anatomy.
When positioning an unconscious, sedated, or weak patient, make certain that you have
complete control of the part you are moving before you begin.


Surgical positions that may be adopted in relation to the surgery to be performed
include:-
Horizontal recumbent/ supine/ dorsal
The patient is placed flat on back with legs extended or slightly flexed. A bath blanket
is placed over patient lengthwise. Pillows should be placed under the neck to prevent
neck hyperextension. Arms should be placed (pronated) along the trunk. Extra pillows
should be placed at the pelvis to prevent hyper rotation
Dorsal recumbent
Patient is placed flat on back with one pillow under head; the knees flexed and separated
and feet flat on bed. A blanket is arranged to cover extremities and expose perineum.
Prone position
Patient lies on his/her abdomen. The head is turned to either side for comfort. Pillow is
placed under the lower chest, pelvis and ankles for comfort. Arms may be placed on the
side or flexed near the head
Lateral/side lying
Patient is placed on the side with the head supported on low pillow. A pillow is used to
support the body anteriorly and another one is tucked at the waist from the back to
support the patient in the position. Legs are flexed forwards and pillow a placed
lengthwise between the legs to separate them and support the top leg
Sims/recovery/semi prone position
The patient is placed on left side somewhat obliquely across the bed with buttocks to
edge of mattress. The body is inclined forward, the left arm drawn back under patient
and the right arm placed in front. The knees are flexed upon the body—the right more
than the left.A pillow is placed under the head
Semi – Fowlers Position
The bed is tilted to an angle of 15 – 30 degrees
High Fowlers Position
Used when the head of the bed needs to be elevated as high as possible. The upper half
of the patient's body is between 60 degrees and 90 degrees in relation to the lower half
of their body. The legs of the patient may be straight or bent.
Trendlenburg position
Client lies in supine position on an adjustable bed or operating table. S/he is then secured
and supported using straps on the table before adjusting the bed/table. The bed/table is
then tilted to lower the head at an angle of 45 degrees below the horizontal plane.
Reverese trendelenburg
The reverse trendelenburg position is used to expose the prostate and upper abdominal
region during surgery. This position also helps respiration for overweight and obese
individuals.
Dorsal lithotomy
The patient is placed in supine position on adjustable bed/ examination table/operating
table
Client’s buttocks are placed as close as possible to the edge of the bed/table. Both knees
are flexed simultaneously and supported on stirrups to prevent injury when each leg is
lifted singly
Knee – chest/genu-pectoral position
Client is positioned in prone position. The client then assisted to kneel on the bed raising
hips to the air and resting her weight on her chest and knees. The head is turned to one
side, supported on a pillow and arms flexed at the elbows extending, then to the bed in
front of her.
Jack knife or kroaske or bozeman
Patient is placed on a prone position with the hips directly over the band of the examining
table. The table is tipped with the head lower than the hips, the foot part of the table
lowered so that the patients feet are below the level of his head. A pillow is placed under
the pelvis and abdomen to relieve the strain.




Supine     position    retrieved    from:    https://www.europeanmedical.info/surgical-
applications/images/8917_65_230-ureteral-stent-placement-procedure.jpg
Lithotomy position retrieved from: https://www.europeanmedical.info/surgical-
applications/images/8917_65_233-lithotomy-position.jpg




Prone      position   retrieved   from:   https://www.europeanmedical.info/surgical-
applications/images/8917_65_242-arm-abduction-table-positioning.jpg




Jacknife                   position                   retrieved               from:
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/f/f6/Jack_-
_knife_position.gif/220px-Jack_-_knife_position.gif
Fowlers position retrieved from: https://www.steris.com/-/media/images/knowledge-
center/surgical-equipment/complete-guide-to-patient-
positioning/fowlers.ashx?h=250&w=242&hash=1F9F866B55B958408E6029C2D001
98EC




Sims position retrieved from: https://www.steris.com/-/media/images/knowledge-
center/surgical-equipment/complete-guide-to-patient-
positioning/sims.ashx?h=135&w=242&hash=065AE5563C71B1ABD84C4C71601D5
D15
Lateral position retrieved from: https://www.steris.com/-/media/images/knowledge-
center/surgical-equipment/complete-guide-to-patient-
positioning/lateral.ashx?h=160&w=242&hash=14072CF871DD7C5185748CBF87200
9ED




Trendelenburg       position      retrieved      from:     https://www.steris.com/-
/media/images/knowledge-center/surgical-equipment/the-ultimate-guide-to-the-
trendelenburg-position/trendelenburg-position-
picture.ashx?h=200&w=250&hash=1F3BE469A7D7EF784B9BE3C4BEBE228A




Knee               chest              position             link                adress:
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/60/Diseases_of_the_kidney
s%2C_ureters_and_bladder%2C_with_special_reference_to_the_diseases_of_women_
%281922%29_%2814763493624%29.jpg/220px-
Reverse        trendelenburg     position   image      adress:    https://www.steris.com/-
/media/images/knowledge-center/surgical-equipment/the-ultimate-guide-to-the-
trendelenburg-position/reverse-trendelenburg-position-
picture.ashx?h=200&w=250&hash=01491BB097670B7329D6CE217E6E854F


Making drills and evacuation
Fire drills are held regularly in all health care facilities. Staff training on fire includes
emergency response, the location of fire extinguishers and fire escape routes, and how
to activate the fire alert system. Most fire extinguishers used in the operating room are
water-based, carbon dioxide, or dry powder. Carbon dioxide is the preferred type for
operating room fires.
During fire extinguisher training, employees and students are asked to remember the
acronym PASS:
Pull the ring from the handle.
Aim the nozzle at the base of the fire.
Squeeze the handle.
Sweep the fire with tank contents
Fire in the Operating Room
Patient fire
Patient fire is a devastating event. Approximately 21% of patient fires occur in the
airway, 44% on the face, 8% inside the patient, and 26% on the skin. It takes only
moments for a flash fire to engulf the patient. To stop the progression of the fire, the
triangle of fire must be broken. This means that one or more components (fuel, oxygen,
or source of ignition) must be removed from the fire.
During a patient fire, time is critical. Three steps are immediately taken to protect the
patient and stop the fire:
1. Shut off the flow of all gases to the patient’s airway.
2. Remove any burning objects from the surgical site.
3. Assess the patient for injury and respond appropriately. The anesthesia care provider
reduces the flow of oxygen in the event of fire around the airway. At the same time,
burning objects are removed from the field as safely as possible. The surgical
technologist must stand by for direction from the surgeon and other staff members in the
room. Patient fires usually can be contained when one of the elements of the fire has
been removed. The next phase of the emergency focuses on the patient’s injuries.
Structural Fire
If the fire extends beyond the immediate patient area, the surgical team must activate the
hospital evacuation plan. This plan is based on four immediate actions, which are easily
remembered by the acronym RACE:
Rescue patients in the immediate area of the fire.
Alert other people to the fire so that they can assist in patient removal and response.
Activate the fire alert system.
Contain the fire. Shut all doors to slow the spread of smoke and flame. Always shut off
thezone valves controlling inline gases to the room.
Evacuate personnel in the areas around the fire.


Learning Activities
Case study
You are assisting in monitoring a patient during the post anesthesia phase. Once the
patient has recovered from effects of anesthesia and you are planning to inform the
perioperative nurse to conduct her assessment in order to plan for discharge to the ward,
you realise that the patient has become unresponsive. What will you do?


Field Visit to Theatre
Objectives of the visit
Patient is identified according to procedure to be performed; IP. No, file and
identification band
Completeness of theatre team is checked according to WHO standards
Patient is transferred to the operation table according to SOPs
Patient is positioned according to procedure to be performed
Positioners are strapped onto the patient as per SOPs
Patient is transferred to PT trolley as per SOPs
Drills and Evacuation procedure is carried out according to OSH Act


Self-Assessment
You are provided with the following questions for self -assessment, attempt them
and check your responses
What are two ways of identifying a patient correctly in surgical theatre?
What steps will you follow to verify the identity of a patient?
The operation theatre team is composed of different members. What are the roles of the
following members?
Surgical assistants
Scrub nurse
What three (3) characteristics that define a good team?
Explain the steps will you follow to safely transfer a patient to the operation table?
What are two goals of correct patient positioning in the operation theatre?
What are your four (4) responsibilities as a theatre technician during patient positioning?
Describe three positions that may be used during a surgical operation
Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials
Ideal operation theatre bed
Patient positioners
Bed appliances
Emergency trolley
Fire extinguishers for different fire types


References
Association of periOperative Registered Nurses (AORN): Recommended practices for
preoperative patient skin antisepsis. In 2011 perioperative standards and recommended
practices, Denver,
2011, AORN.
Association of periOperative Registered Nurses (AORN): Fire safety in perioperative
settings, AORN Journal 86:2141, 2011..
Phillips, N. (2007). Berry and Kohn’s operating room technique (11th ed.). St.
Louis: Mosby
Joanna Kotcher Fuller. (2013). Surgical Technology: Principles And Practice. 6th ed. St.
Louis, Mo.: Elsevier.


RESPONSES
What are two ways of identifying a patient correctly in surgical theatre?
The patient’s wrist or ankle band is imprinted with the patient’s name and other unique
identifiers such as birth date and hospital number.
The patient’s identification card
The patient’s charts
What steps will you follow to verify the identity of a patient?
Examine the patient’s identity band. Compare both the name and the number with those
on the patient’s chart.
Ask the patient to state his or her full name and date of birth. Do not call the patient by
name before asking the patient to state his or her name.
Ask the patient to tell you what procedure he or she is undergoing and to point to the
side on which the surgery will take place.
If the patient does not speak English, or seems to have difficulty understanding, you must
seek assistance from an interpreter. This information can be determined ahead of time
so that an appropriate interpreter is available.
Remember that patients may be anxious or worried before surgery and might answer
closed-ended questions indiscriminately. It is necessary to question the patient without
giving the answer.
The operation theatre team is composed of different members. What are the roles of the
following members?
Surgical assistants scrub and perform the surgery. The person in the scrub role, either a
nurse or a theatre technologist, provides sterile instruments and supplies to the surgeon
during the procedure.
The circulating nurse coordinates the care of the patient in the Operation room (OR).
Care provided by the circulating nurse includes assisting with patient positioning,
preparing the patient’s skin for surgery, managing surgical specimens, anticipating the
needs of the surgical team, and documenting intraoperative events.
What three (3) characteristics that define a good team?
Yielding - It means accepting the fact that others have valid points of view and conceding
when one has made incorrect assumptions or conclusions.
Change - Team members must identify new tasks or procedures and implement them
with as little disruption as possible.
Politeness - This manner in which people speak to and behave toward each other. The
attributes of acceptable behavior include respect, gratitude, and acceptance.
Collaboration- This is working together for a common purpose. In the operating room,
personnel contribute their skills, time, and energy to the care of the surgical patient.
Explain the steps will you follow to safely transfer a patient to the operation table?
Verify the patient identity, procedure to be performed and a signed consent form. Assess
patient’s mobility status and institutional policy to determine how to move the patient
Ensure presence of sufficient staff members
Wheel the stretcher/bed is wheeled close to the operation table, the wheels of both the
operation bed and the stretcher/bed locked and the side rail that is proximal to the
operation bed lowered. Invasive lines and devices are made visible and kept free from
entanglement.
Some team members stand at the far end of the operation table; others on the proximal
end and use appropriate body mechanisms to prevent injury to self during transferring
of the patient.
A roller or a transfer sheet is used to transfer a patient if they are not mobile and invasive
devices supported in place to prevent entanglement.
What are two goals of correct patient positioning in the operation theatre?
To allow optimum access to the operative site
To reduce adverse physiological effects and prevent injury during surgery
To permit optimum access for anesthesia care (includes access to venous and arterial
sites, airway, and monitoring sites)
What are your four (4) responsibilities as a theatre technician during patient positioning?
Understand common positions and the surgeries for which these positions are used
Know ahead of time the position that will be used for each assigned surgical procedure
Proactively prevent accident and injury during positioning
Question any aspect of the patient’s position that appears to have risk potential
Remain alert and focused on patient safety
Communicate clearly with other members of the team
Describe three positions that may be used during a surgical operation
Dorsal recumbent- Patient is placed flat on back with one pillow under head; the knees
flexed and separated and feet flat on bed. A blanket is arranged to cover extremities and
expose perineum.
Prone position- Patient lies on his/her abdomen. The head is turned to either side for
comfort. Pillow is placed under the lower chest, pelvis and ankles for comfort. Arms
may be placed on the side or flexed near the head
Lateral/side lying- Patient is placed on the side with the head supported on low pillow.
A pillow is used to support the body anteriorly and another one is tucked at the waist
from the back to support the patient in the position. Legs are flexed forwards and pillow
a placed lengthwise between the legs to separate them and support the top leg
Sims/recovery/semi prone position- The patient is placed on left side somewhat
obliquely across the bed with buttocks to edge of mattress. The body is inclined forward,
the left arm drawn back under patient and the right arm placed in front. The knees are
flexed upon the body—the right more than the left.A pillow is placed under the head
Semi – Fowlers Position- The bed is tilted to an angle of 15 – 30 degrees
High Fowlers Position -Used when the head of the bed needs to be elevated as high as
possible. The upper half of the patient's body is between 60 degrees and 90 degrees in
relation to the lower half of their body. The legs of the patient may be straight or bent.
Trendlenburg position- Client lies in supine position on an adjustable bed or operating
table. S/he is then secured and supported using straps on the table before adjusting the
bed/table. The bed/table is then tilted to lower the head at an angle of 45 degrees below
the horizontal plane.
Reverese trendelenburg- The reverse trendelenburg position is used to expose the
prostate and upper abdominal region during surgery. This position also helps respiration
for overweight and obese individuals.
Dorsal lithotomy- The patient is placed in supine position on adjustable bed/
examination table/operating tableClient’s buttocks are placed as close as possible to the
edge of the bed/table. Both knees are flexed simultaneously and supported on stirrups to
prevent injury when each leg is lifted singly
Knee – chest/genu-pectoral position- Client is positioned in prone position. The client
then assisted to kneel on the bed raising hips to the air and resting her weight on her
chest and knees. The head is turned to one side, supported on a pillow and arms flexed
at the elbows extending, then to the bed in front of her.
 Jack knife or kroaske or bozeman-Patient is placed on a prone position with the hips
  directly over the band of the examining table. The table is tipped with the head lower
  than the hips, the foot part of the table lowered so that the patients feet are below the
  level of his head. A pillow is placed under the pelvis and abdomen to relieve the strain.



Learning Outcome 4 Handle instruments, apparatus and consumables
 Introduction to the learning outcome
 This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to plan for
  Execution of Perioperative Theatre Safety Precautions. It includes Identification of
  Operation Theatre       Instrument, apparatus and consumables; Operation Theatre
  Instrument, apparatus and consumables handling techniques; Verification and recording
  of Operation Theatre Instrument, apparatus and consumables; Disposal of swabs and
  sharps; Environmental health; Operation Theatre Practice
 1.2.4.2 Performance Standard
     1. instruments and consumables are identified according to the procedure to be
            carried out
     2. Instruments, swabs and sharps are counted before and after the procedure
            according to WHO standards
     3. Instruments, swabs, sharps and consumables are confirmed and recorded
            according to the procedure performed
     4. Swabs and sharps are discarded according to WHO standards and
            environmental protection regulation and SOPs

 1.2.4.3 Information Sheet
 Definition of terms
 Swabs- porous materials used to absorb body fluids such as blood or pus from body
  tissues
 Theatre instruments- devices used to perform certain theatre activities such as cutting,
  scooping, tissue scrapping, coagulation, holding, grasping or even suturing
 Identification of Operation Theatre Instrument apparatus and consumables
 Expertise in surgical instrumentation is among the most important roles of the surgical
  technologist. Familiarity with instruments and their names (sometimes different from
  one region to another, and even among health facilities) is also one of the most difficult
  learning curves for students in surgery. The most useful way to learn the names and use
of instruments is to study them in association with the surgeries they are used in rather
than in isolation, such as in a catalog. Most surgical instruments can be classified into
these 4 basic types:
Cutting and Dissecting – These instruments usually have sharp edges or tips to cut
through skin, tissue and suture material. Surgeons need to cut and dissect tissue to
explore irregular growths and to remove dangerous or damaged tissue. These
instruments have single or double razor-sharp edges or blades. OR personnel need to be
very careful to avoid injuries, and regularly inspect these instruments before using, for
re-sharpening or replacement. Cutting instruments include the following:-
Surgical Blade/scapel/ “the knife”
It is used whenever razor sharp cutting is required for tissue dissection. It is detachable
from the knife handle, although single-use scalpels are available and
these do not detach. They are numbered according to their size and shape and this is
known as the Bard-Parker system according to the company that first manufactured
them. Each specific number handle is designed for only certain blades and the numbering
system is consistent across all manufacturers. The number of the blade corresponds to a
specific size and shape.
Types of blades




Image address: https://epomedicine.com/wpcontent/uploads/2020/07/blade-2.png
Image address:
https://epomedicine.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/blade-3.png
Image address:
https://epomedicine.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/blade-4.png
Scissors
High quality surgical scissors are distinguished by the sharpness of the cutting edges,
balance, metal composition, and design of the point. Scissors with extremely sharp
points are intended to sever very small points of tissue during dissection. The blades of
the high quality scissor are coated with tungsten or other hardened alloy to maintain
sharpness.
Types of surgical scissors
Small, sharp-tipped scissors, such as iris scissors, are used for extremely fine dissection
in plastic surgery.
Castroviejo scissors are commonly used in microsurgery.
Round-tipped, light dissecting scissors, such as Metzenbaum scissors, are used
extensively on delicate tissue in general surgery. They are the most commonly used
scissors in general surgery
Fibrous connective tissue requires heavier scissors, such as the curved Mayo scissors.
Straight Mayo scissors are used for cutting suture. NB: tissue scissors must never be used
to cut suture because it dulls them quickly.
Wire-cutting scissors are used for stainless steel and other metal suture materials.




Image         address         to         types         of        surgical         scissors:
https://image.slidesharecdn.com/surgicalcatalog-121209110056-phpapp02/95/surgical-
and-dental-instruments-12-638.jpg?cb=1392649304
Rongeur
Used to cut and extract tissue and is distinguished by having a spring-loaded hinge. The
tips are cupped or beveled and the edges are sharp.
Types of roungers
single hinge (single-action rongeur) or two hinges (doubleaction rongeur).
A double-action rongeur creates twice the leverage of a single-action rongeur.
Stille rongeur- heavier rongeur used in orthopedic and neurosurgical procedures
Kerrison rongeur,- A long-handled delicate rongeur, often is used in spinal surgery.
Pituitary rongeur- long, fine-tipped rongeur used to remove tissue in areas that are
difficult to reach, such as the vertebral column and nasal sinus.




Kerrison ronguer image adress:
https://encrypted-tbn0.gstatic.com/images?q=tbn:ANd9GcSYJtDLrgHPnmnteowjhjo-
ltQ0jsPfF3Ljww&usqp=CAU
Pictorial link to other types of ronguers: https://orsupply.com/category/876_872_911


Shears
They are large cutting instruments used to sever bone tissue. They are commonly used
during thoracic surgery when one or more ribs must be cut for access to the chest cavity.
Curette
It is a small cup with a sharpened, serrated, or smooth rim at the end of the handle used
in
many specialties for scooping out tissue, including bone and soft tissue.Very fine curettes
are used in ear, paranasal, and spinal surgery while larger heavier curettes are used in
orthopedic procedures. Soft tissue curettes are used in gynecological surgery for
endometrial curettage.




Currette :A courtesy Integra Miltex, York, Pa


Osteotome, Chisel, and Gouge
Chisel - an orthopedic cutting instrument that is used with a mallet (like chisels used in
sculpting or carpentry). They are available in many widths and sizes that fit a particular
specialty. For example, a chisel used in paranasal surgery is much more delicate than
one designed for the tibia. Chisels and osteotomes are often confused with one another
yet the osteotome is beveled on both sides, whereas a chisel blade is sloped on one side
only. A large osteotome often is used to remove bone from the iliac crest for use as a
graft elsewhere in the body. The chisel produces a straight-sided cut. A gouge is a V-
shaped bone chisel whose cut looks like a small trough.




Chisel: A courtesy Integra Miltex, York, Pa


Elevator
It is used to separate or “lift” tissue mostly in separating the periosteum from bone and
in vascular surgery.Types of elevators
The heavy, round cutting elevator, such as the Lambotte elevator, slices tissue as it
elevates.
The small, square-tipped Key elevator also has a sharp edge but is much more delicate.
Very finely balanced elevators, such as the Penfield and Freer elevators, are used in soft
tissue surgery such as neural and vascular procedures.
The joker is a very commonly used elevator. Its short handle and strong tip make it ideal
for separating connective tissue layers without causing bleeding
Rasp
It is used to remodel bone. Many sizes, shapes, and surfaces are available.
Fine rasps are used in ear, nose, and throat surgery for the delicate bones and surfaces
of the nasal sinuses and ear.
Heavy rasps are used to ream the medullary canal of long bones in preparation for an
implant or to prepare the surface of the humerus before sutures are attached.
A rib stripper is a type of rasp used to scrape tough connective tissue from the surface
of a rib before it is cut with rib shears. Examples of rib strippers include Matson,
Alexander, and Doyen rib rasps.
Saw
They are used in procedures that require bone cutting.
Clamping and Occluding – Are used in many surgical procedures for compressing blood
vessels or hollow organs, to prevent their contents from leaking. These instruments are
also used to control bleeding. They are either straight, curved or angled, and have a
variety of inner jaw patterns.




Image address on theatre clamps: https://c8.alamy.com/comp/CFC7YF/close-up-of-
clamps-surgical-instruments-medical-and-surgical-equipment-CFC7YF.jpg


Retracting and Exposing – These surgical instruments are used to hold back, or retract
organs and tissue so the surgeon has access to the operative area. They spread open the
skin, ribs and other tissue; and are also used separate the edges of a surgical incision.
Some retracting and exposing instruments are “self-retaining,” meaning they stay open
on their own. Others manual styles need to be held open by      .
Examples of retractors:
Grasping and Holding – These instruments, as their name suggests, are used to grasp and
hold tissue or blood vessels that may be in the way during a surgical procedure. Medical
assistants must make sure these instruments are working correctly, and that their locking
mechanisms are lubricated for easy opening and closing, particularly after cleaning and
reprocessing. Forceps are a very good example of these types of instruments.
The following link provides further details on classification of instruments with
examples and pictures: https://www.surgicalholdings.co.uk/download-catalogue.html
Operation Theatre Instrument, apparatus and consumables handling techniques
The surgical technologist takes a proactive role in checking instruments for safety and
correct operation. This can be done while instruments are being prepared for a procedure,
or after the procedure when instruments are sorted and prepared for terminal disinfection.
Stainless steel instruments can be damaged mechanically or structurally, or there can be
defects on the surface that lead to weakness or cross-infection. Damaged instruments
must be withdrawn from service because they can lead to patient injury, lost operating
time, and increased expense. Equipment and instrument management begins in the
operating room at the point of instrument use.
General guidelines in handling of instruments include the following:
Inspect all instruments before use on the instruments table and clearly identify any
defective or missing instruments.
Handle instruments carefully and one at a time or in small numbers.
Use instruments only for the purpose for which they were intended.
Use scissors only for the material for which they were designed because cutting other
materials can cause misalignment, loss of sharpness or damage.
Use forceps appropriate to the task at hand because improper alignment can create
serious problems with function and harm to the patient
Match needle holders to the size of needle for which it is intended.
During the procedure, wipe blood and tissue from instruments immediately after use.
Debris that is allowed to dry on instruments causes deterioration, corrosion, and pitting.
Saline solution may be be used to wipe instruments that will be used again during the
procedure.
Protect tips of instruments with tip protectors to prevent them contacting other
instruments and snagging on towels and sponges
Remove disposable sharps and manage sharps appropriately following the procedure.
During preparation of instruments, open box locks, insure that all multipart instruments
are disassembled, keep parts together for easy reassembly after processing, expose all
surfaces to come into contact with cleaning, disinfectants, and sterilants
All cannulated equipment and handpieces should be flushed.
Organize instruments into sets- All instruments, used and unused, go back into the set.
Place heavy instruments on the bottom; lighter instruments on top.
Contain contaminated instruments to protect personnel.
Transport instruments to SPD as quickly as possible- Instruments should not remain in
water for lengthy periods of time because biofilms may form, particularly within lumens.
Follow the correct procedure for decontamination of instruments as per WHO standards
or institutional policy.
Use this link for further details on instruments handling: https://rocol.com.co/wp-
content/uploads/2015/07/CE-ManagingSurgicalInstruments-131209-FINAL.pdf
Common techniques for inspection of instruments are as outlined in the following video
link
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CF4WbcqR9RI
Verification and recording of Operation Theatre Instruments, apparatus and
consumables
Different registers are used to verify and maintain a record of operation theatre
instruments and other supplies. The unit of competency ‘maintain theatre instruments
and apparatus’ details how to conduct verification of operation theatre instruments,
apparatus and consumables.
Disposal of swabs and sharps
In all surgical procedures, all sponges and sharps are counted before, during, and at the
end of the procedure.Therefore, before swabs and sharps are disposed, a count must be
performed before swabs and sharps disposal. The following is an outline of the standard
procedure for surgical count:-
What
• Soft goods (textiles) including radiopaque sponges of all types, surgical towels, and
packing material (e.g., material used in the nasal cavity to absorb blood)
• Individual suture packages
• Sharps including intact knife blades, hypodermic needles, suture needles, trocars, and
fragments, if broken
• Instruments
• Miscellaneous items such as electrosurgery tips, cranial (Raney type) clips and their
cartridges, umbilical and vessel loops, electrosurgery cleaning pads, small bottles and
their caps, medical device parts, and any other object that can be lost in the surgical
wound
When
• Before the procedure (to establish a baseline)
• Whenever additional items are introduced to the sterile field intraoperatively
• At the start of wound closure
• Before closing any hollow organ
• Before closing a body cavity
• During closure of skin or other final tissue layer
• Whenever permanent relief personnel join the surgical team
• At the request of the surgeon or any other team member
How
• According to the healthcare institution’s policy
• In a systematic, deliberate way, without distraction or interruption
• Without deviation from policy and protocol
• In an established sequence by the type of item being counted (e.g. instruments, sponges,
sharps)
• By separating or pointing to each and every item and counting them individually
• Audibly and visually; both people performing the count do so aloud, as they see the
items being counted
Who
• As designated by health care facility policy
• The circulator and scrubbed technologist or nurse
• Other members of the sterile team and circulator
All counts are documented in the patient record. Documentation includes names of the
individuals who participated in the counts (including relief staff) and their signatures
attesting to a correct or incorrect count. Count sheets on which real-time counts are
documented may become part of the permanent record, according to facility policy.
A retained item is reported as a sentinel event, even if the item is eventually located and
the count validated. This requires documentation on an incident report or by other facility
protocol. If the item is found, it is documented as a near miss. The report must include
steps taken to find the missing item. Once a count has been complete, swabs and sharps
are discarded in relation to OSHA guidelines.


Environmental health
The surgical environment contains many potential sources of environmental hazard.
Some of these are obvious, but others are not. Environmental engineering in the
operating room follows national medical engineering standards for electrical circuits,
inline gases, lighting, and other utilities. Strict safety standards ensure that patients and
staff members are protected from extreme hazards and accidents such as fire, explosion,
and electrocution.


Learning Activities
Case study
You are participating in a surgical count after skin count. You and your team observe
that there is a missing gauze. What will you do as a perioperative theatre technician?


Field Visit to Theatre
Objectives of the visit
To identify instruments and consumables according to the procedure to be carried out
To count instruments, swabs and sharps before and after the procedure according to
WHO standards
To confirm and record instruments, swabs, sharps and consumables according to the
procedure performed
To discard swabs and sharps according to WHO standards and environmental protection
regulation and SOPs
1.2.4.4.3 Self-Assessment
You are provided with the following questions for self -assessment, attempt them
and check your responses
Describe ten (10) guidelines for safe handling of theatre instruments and apparatuses.
What is an alexander rasp used for in a surgical operation?
Explain five (5) types of surgical scissors and their specific use in theatre.
What are three shortcomings of using damaged operation theatre instruments and
apparatus?
What should be counted in a standard procedure for surgical count?
When should standard surgical counts be performed?
Who should be involved in a surgical count?
What should be documented after a surgical count?
1.2.4.5 Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials
Assorted operation theatre instruments: cutting. Holding/grasping, retracting, clamping
and occluding instruments
Operation theatre apparatus and consumables such as Branulars, Cannula, Gloves,
Scrubs, Blades, swabs
1.2.4.6 References
Linda Timmons &Terri Goodman:            Effective management of surgical instrument.
Retrieved            from:          https://rocol.com.co/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/CE-
ManagingSurgicalInstruments-131209-FINAL.pdf on 7th December 2020.
Association of periOperative Registered Nurses (AORN): Recommended practices for
Phillips, N. (2007). Berry and Kohn’s operating room technique (11th ed.). St.
Louis: Mosby
Joanna Kotcher Fuller. (2013). Surgical Technology: Principles And Practice. 6th ed. St.
Louis, Mo.: Elsevier.
Nilsen E: Managing equipment and instruments in the operating room, AORN Journal
81:349, 2005.
Spry C: Care and handling of basic surgical instruments, AORN Journal 86:S77, 2007


RESPONSES
Describe ten (10) guidelines for handling of operation theatre instruments and
apparatuses
Inspect all instruments before use on the instruments table and clearly identify any
defective or missing instruments.
Handle instruments carefully and one at a time or in small numbers.
Use instruments only for the purpose for which they were intended.
Use scissors only for the material for which they were designed because cutting other
materials can cause misalignment, loss of sharpness or damage.
Use forceps appropriate to the task at hand because improper alignment can create
serious problems with function and harm to the patient
Match needle holders to the size of needle for which it is intended.
During the procedure, wipe blood and tissue from instruments immediately after use.
Debris that is allowed to dry on instruments causes deterioration, corrosion, and pitting.
Saline solution may be be used to wipe instruments that will be used again during the
procedure.
Protect tips of instruments with tip protectors to prevent them contacting other
instruments and snagging on towels and sponges
Remove disposable sharps and manage sharps appropriately following the procedure.
During preparation of instruments, open box locks, insure that all multipart instruments
are disassembled, keep parts together for easy reassembly after processing, expose all
surfaces to come into contact with cleaning, disinfectants, and sterilants
All cannulated equipment and handpieces should be flushed.
Organize instruments into sets- All instruments, used and unused, go back into the set.
Place heavy instruments on the bottom; lighter instruments on top.
Contain contaminated instruments to protect personnel.
Transport instruments to SPD as quickly as possible- Instruments should not remain in
water for lengthy periods of time because biofilms may form, particularly within lumens.
Follow the correct procedure for decontamination of instruments as per WHO standards
or institutional policy.
What is an Alexander rasp used for in a surgical operation?
It is used to scrape tough connective tissue from the surface of a rib before it is cut with
rib shear.
Explain five (5) types of surgical scissors and their specific use in theatre
Small, sharp-tipped scissors, such as iris scissors, are used for extremely fine dissection
in plastic surgery.
Castroviejo scissors are commonly used in microsurgery.
Round-tipped, light dissecting scissors, such as Metzenbaum scissors, are used
extensively on delicate tissue in general surgery. They are the most commonly used
scissors in general surgery
Fibrous connective tissue requires heavier scissors, such as the curved Mayo scissors.
Straight Mayo scissors are used for cutting suture. NB: tissue scissors must never be used
to cut suture because it dulls them quickly.
Wire-cutting scissors are used for stainless steel and other metal suture materials.
What are three shortcomings of using damaged operation theatre instruments and
apparatus?
they can lead to patient injury
lost operating time,
increased expense.
What should be counted in a standard procedure for surgical count?
Soft goods (textiles) including radiopaque sponges of all types, surgical towels, and
packing material (e.g., material used in the nasal cavity to absorb blood)
Individual suture packages
Sharps including intact knife blades, hypodermic needles, suture needles, trocars, and
fragments, if broken
Instruments
Miscellaneous items such as electrosurgery tips, cranial (Raney type) clips and their
cartridges, umbilical and vessel loops, electrosurgery cleaning pads, small bottles and
their caps, medical device parts, and any other object that can be lost in the surgical
wound
When should standard surgical counts be performed?
Before the procedure (to establish a baseline)
Whenever additional items are introduced to the sterile field intraoperatively
At the start of wound closure
Before closing any hollow organ
Before closing a body cavity
During closure of skin or other final tissue layer
Whenever permanent relief personnel join the surgical team
At the request of the surgeon or any other team member
Who should be involved in a surgical count?
The circulator
scrubbed technologist or nurse
Other members of the sterile team
What should be documented after a surgical count?
names of the individuals who participated in the counts
their signatures
Date and time of the count
An attest to a correct or incorrect count.
Learning Outcome 5 Respond to Operation Theatre alarms and signals
 Introduction to the learning outcome
 This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to plan for
  Execution of Perioperative Theatre Safety Precautions. It includes types of theatre
  alarms, Identifying theatre alarms and      signals , Analysis of alarms and signals,
  Responding to alarms and signals, Operation Theatre Practice


 1.2.5.2 Performance Standard
    I.     Theatre alarm signals are identified in accordance with type and source of
           alarm
   II.     Theatre alarms signals are received and analysed according to type and source
           of alarm
  III.     Signals are acted upon according to work place policy and SOPs

 1.2.5.5 Information Sheet
 Definition of terms
 Alarm- a system designed to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention
  and to summon emergency medical personnel
 Signal- something that conveys information or causes an action.


 Types of theatre alarms
 Alarm systems are designed to alert staff members to safety risks and should never be
  turned off or made barely audible. Alarms are key components of peri-operative
  monitoring devices and function as signals for life-threatening situations as well as
  device malfunction or imminent danger. An alarm is an automatic warning that results
  from a measurement, or any other acquisition of descriptors of a state, and indicates a
  relevant deviation from a normal state.
 Common operation theatre alarms
 Shouting Alarms
 Bell alarm
 Electronic alarms
 The following link provides further description of common perioperative theatre theatre
  alarms
 https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3672485/table/T1/?report=objectonly
Identifying theatre alarms and signals
The Association of Theatre Technologists developed guidelines to support healthcare
delivery organizations reinforce best practices in alarm management as related to the
role and duties of the Certified Surgical Technologist (perioperative theatre
technologist).
The surgery department should develop a systematic, coordinated approach to the safe
management of alarms that involves the surgical team, information technology experts,
healthcare technology management technicians (biomedical technicians), risk
management and health delivery organization administration.
The surgery department should complete a thorough review of an adverse event
involving harm or potential harm to a patient and improper management of an alarm(s).
The perioperative theatre technologist is responsible for the control of the active
electrode (also called electrosurgical or electrocautery pencil or Bovie) when not in use
to prevent inadvertent activation to avoid burns to the patient and surgical team, and
ignition or puncture of the drapes.
The perioperative theatre technologist should complete continuing education to remain
current in their knowledge of alarm management.


1.2.5.4 Learning Activities
1.2.5.4.1 Case study
You are are performing decontamination of instruments in theatre when you hear a fire
alarm. There is an ongoing surgical operation operation on the theatre table and the
patient has received general anesthesia. What steps will you take?
1.2.5.4.2 Field Visit to Theatre
Objectives of the visit
To identify Theatre alarm signals in accordance with type and source of alarm
To receive and analyse theatre alarms signals according to type and source of alarm
To act upon Signals according to work place policy and SOPs
1.2.5.5 Assignment
Read and make notes on:
Analysis of alarms and signals
Responding to alarms and signals
1.2.5.6 Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials
Theatre alarms- ventilatory, hemodynamic and others.
Record books
Theatre equipment
A document of institution policies specific to theatre


1.2.5.7 References
AAMI Foundation. Clinical alarm management compendium. 2016. Retrieved on 8th
December                                    2020                                     from:
http://s3.amazonaws.com/rdcmsaami/files/production/public/FileDownloads/Foundatio
n/Reports/Alarm_Compendium_2015.pdf2016.
Association of periOperative Registered Nurses (AORN): Recommended practices for
preoperative patient skin antisepsis. In 2011 perioperative standards and recommended
practices, Denver, 2011, AORN.
Association of periOperative Registered Nurses (AORN): Fire safety in perioperative
settings, AORN Journal 86:2141, 2011..
Phillips, N. (2007). Berry and Kohn’s operating room technique (11th ed.). St.
Louis: Mosby
Joanna Kotcher Fuller. (2013). Surgical Technology: Principles And Practice. 6th ed. St.
Louis, Mo.: Elsevier.



  Learning Outcome 6 Evaluate and wind-up perioperative Theatre safety
Introduction to the learning outcome
This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to plan for
Execution of Perioperative Theatre Safety Precautions. It includes Occupation health
and safety Act, Operation Theatre room layout, Documentation of perioperative safety
measures ,Waste disposal and Operation Theatre Practice.


1.2.6.2 Performance Standard
   1. Safety measures are followed in accordance with Occupational Safety & health Act
       standards
   2. Operation theatre is well set according to Standard Operation Procedures and
       workplace policy
    3. Operation theatre safety measures are documented according to workplace policy
    4. Incident report is written as per workplace policy
    5. Waste is disposed with due regard to environment protection regulations

1.2.6.3 Information Sheet
Definition of terms
Safety measures- measures taken to reduce harm or improve safety
Standard operating procedures-         a set of step-by-step instructions compiled by
an organization to help workers carry out routine operations
Occupation health and safety Act, 2007
Occupational Safety and Health (OSH) is an area concerned with protecting the safety,
health and welfare of people engaged in work or employment. OSH targets four basic
aspects:
The protection and promotion of workers health by preventing and controlling
occupational diseases and accidents
The development and promotion of healthy and safe work, work environments and work
organizations
Enhancement of physical, mental and social well-being of workers; and
Enabling workers to conduct socially and economically productive lives and to
contribute positively to sustainable development (WHO 2010).
Responsibility of an organization’s management
To ensure that the Occupational Safety and Health Policy, Organizational
Responsibilities and the detailed arrangements concerning the health, safety and welfare
of all members of staff, clients, contractors, visitors and students are made known and
implemented in theatre
To review the written statement of the general policy with respect to safety and health in
the workplace;
To carry out suitable and sufficient risk assessment to safety and health of members of
staff students and others who within their area of responsibility may be affected by
activities in the health sector.
Where hazards are identified which cannot be eliminated, the manager will ensure that
safe systems of work are designed and implemented, recorded, monitored and reviewed
as necessary and results of the assessments are disseminated to the relevant persons;
Will carry out suitable and sufficient risk assessment to safety and health of members of
staff students and others who within their area of responsibility may be affected by
activities in the health sector.
Where hazards are identified which cannot be eliminated, the manager will ensure that
safe systems of work are designed and implemented, recorded, monitored and reviewed
as necessary and results of the assessments are disseminated to the relevant persons;
Will investigate all accidents, incidents or near misses concerning health and safety with
the view to identifying the cause(s) and preventing a recurrence;
Will participate in regular Occupations and Safety inspections of their          areas of
responsibility in accordance with agreed procedures
Employee’s responsibility
Ensure their own safety, health, and that of persons who may be affected by their act of
commission or omission.
Cooperate with the employer and co-workers in their workplace to ach safe and healthy
work environment by following OSH policy guidelines and standard operating
procedures
Make themselves familiar with the OSH policy guidelines
Use PPE as provided by employer to prevent risk to his/her safety and health
Comply with safety and health Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs)
Report to the supervisor of possible hazards


Operation Theatre room layout
The layout of the surgical department is based primarily on the principles of infection
control—confining and containing areas and sources of contamination.
The design of any surgery department revolves around environmental control, traffic
control, and the desire to prevent surgical site infection (SSI). Such factors as the
separation of clean and soiled work areas and areas of the department specified as
restricted and unrestricted assist in the promotion of this idea. Efficiency is increased
with strategic placement of computers, preparation areas, and staff areas.
Image address for the above operation room: https://www.midhillhospital.org/wp-
content/uploads/2016/11/theatre-surgery-the-device-685x313.jpg
Different Zones/ Areas
Regardless of the design chosen by the facility, certain principles apply universally.
Traffic control follows predetermined traffic patterns that all persons entering the
department are expected to follow. The OR department is divided into four zones based
on varying degrees of cleanliness, in which the bacteriological count progressively
diminishes from the outer to the inner zones (operating area) and is maintained by a
differential decreasing positive pressure ventilation gradient from the inner zone to the
outer zone.
1.Unrestricted zone or clean area.
2.Semi restricted zone or sub sterile area
3.Restricted zone or sterile area
4.Disposal zone or area
Unrestricted/ Clean zone or clean area- This is the area where hospital personnel, OT
personnel, patient's & their attendants can move about in street clothes. Connects
protective zone to aseptic zone and has other areas also like Stores & cleaner room,
equipment store room, maintenance workshop, kitchenette, firefighting device room,
emergency exit.
Semi restricted/ Protective zone or sub-sterile area- After changing from street clothes,
with clean gown, cap & OT slipper, the OT team or personnel are, enter in this area.
(Operating room attire is required). It includes - Change rooms for all medical and
paramedical staff with conveniences, Transfer bay for patient, material & equipment's,
Rooms for administrative staff, Stores & records, Pre & post-operative rooms.I.C.U. and
P.A.C.U.
Restricted/Aseptic zone or sterile area: This zone has operation theatres & operation
room where operations are done. This is a place where staff & patients in street clothes
& shoes are not allowed to enter. Scrubbed personnel wear sterile gowns & gloves & get
ready for operation procedure. (Operating room attire is required)
Disposal zone or area- Dirty utility area, Disposal corridor, OT attire mandatory in this
area
Sub areas:-
Nurses station or counter - Nurses station is an area where nurses and other health care
staff sit behind when not working directly with patients and can perform some of their
duties. The station has a counter that can be approached by visitors and patients who
wish to receive attention from the nurses. It should be spacious enough to allow two or
more personnel to work together.
Pre-operative check area (reception) - It is the area where OT nursing personnel receive
patients. Here patients and his records are checked.
Holding area - This area is planned for IV line insertion, preparation, catheter / gastric
tube insertion, connection of monitors, & shall have O2 and suction lines. Facility for
CPR should be available in this area.
Induction/Anaesthetic room - It should have all facilities as in OT, but there is
controversy as to its need. It should provide space for anaesthetic trolleys and equipment
and should be located with direct access to circulation corridors and ready access to the
operating room. It will also allow cleaning, testing and storing of anaesthesia equipment.
It should have sufficient power outlets and medical gas panels for testing of equipment.
Post anaesthetic care units (PACU)/Post–operative or recovery room – Room where
patients are kept & cared until they are out of anaesthesia & until their vital signs become
stable. These should contain a medication station, hand washing station, nurse station,
storage space for stretchers, supplies and monitors / equipment and gas, suction outlets
and ventilator.
Staff room – Men and women change dress from street cloth to OT attire; lockers and
lavatory are essential; rest room etc. are desirable.
Sanitary facility for staff- One washbasin and one western closet (WC) should be
provided for 8-10 persons. Showers and their number is a matter of local decision.
Inclusion of toilet facilities in changing rooms is not acceptable; they should be located
in an adjacent space.
Offices – for staff nurse and anaesthesia staff- The office should allow access to both
unrestricted and semi-restricted areas as frequent communication with public is needed.
Rest rooms- Pleasant and quiet rest for staff should be arranged either as one large room
for all grades of staff or as separate rooms; both have merits. Comfortable chairs, one
writing table, a book case etc., may be arranged.
Laboratory –
Store room
Scrub room- This is planned to be built within the restricted area. This should be
spacious. Scrub area should have deep & wide sink to avoid splash of water on the
surrounding area. There should be facilities for running water. The taps should be such
that they could be opened or closed by foot pedals or they have long handles that can be
operate by elbows.
Waiting room – Patient's attendants or family member's waiting room with attached toilet


Utility Room - This is also called clean up room where instruments, articles, gloves are
received following surgical procedures. Here all these are cleaned, washed & wiped dry
& then wrapped, stored & sent for sterilization.
Disposal or sluice room - This room receives all soiled linen & dressing. Here all
disposable items are separated according to biochemical waste management code & then
packed in leak proof containers. The soiled linens are sent to the laundry. The OT set up
should be such that it should be possible to dispose off soiled items without taking them
through sub-sterile or sterile areas.
Image address to the above operation theatre zones: https://basicmedicalkey.com/wp-
content/uploads/2017/04/B978032307358500019X_f10-04-9780323073585.jpg


Documentation of perioperative safety measures
Documentation for the surgical procedure is completed as usual, with accurate recording
of the chain of events. Operative records for patient care, anesthesia, sponge counts, and
all usual forms must be completed as for any case.
Assignment: Review guidelines on documentation of perioperative safety measures
Perioperative theatre practice
Recommended practices are optimum behavioral objectives for caregivers. They may
not always be achievable, as standards are, because of limitations in a particular practice
setting. Recommended practices state what ideally can be done. Practice are directed
toward providing safety in the perioperative environment. They are premised in
principles of microbiology, scientific literature, validated research, evidence-based
practice, and experts’ opinions. Although compliance is voluntary, individual
commitment, professional conscience, and the practice setting should guide
perioperative caregivers in using these recommended practices. They represent an
optimal level of practice and are achievable
Sharps, swabs and instruments
It is recommended that counts of swabs, instruments (including scratchpads and
diathermy tips), and sharps (needles and blades) should be undertaken at strategic points
during an operation. This is to ensure no foreign body remains in a patient after closure
of a wound.
The scrub practitioner is responsible for counting all items used in an operation before
incision, at first layer closure, and at skin closure. It is also standard practice to give a
verbal report to the surgeon at the end of the procedure to the effect that all sharps, swabs,
and instruments are correct. The count requires full concentration, should be audible,
and should be carried out by two people, one of whom must be qualified. Both people
should sign the theatre register.


The initial count should be recorded before the operation begins and any items that are
added during the course of the operation should be recorded. All items counted during
the course of the operation should be recorded clearly on a dry-wipe board. Items
removed from the sterile field should be visibly deleted with a scoring line or cross. Each
swab counted must be checked to ensure its radiopaque strip is intact. This is because,
in the event of a lost swab (or sharp, or instrument), the surgeon might request an X-ray
to ensure that it has not been left in the patient. Any item deliberately left inside the
patient should be clearly documented in the patient’s notes.


Every sharp object in a theatre should be regarded as a potential source of injury.
Accepted practices in the handling of sharps should be adhered to, for example avoiding
manual re-sheathing of needles, and disposing of sharps in containers. Needles, blades
or instruments should never be passed directly hand to hand, but should be passed via a
‘neutral zone’, for example a receiver. Needles and blades should be mounted for use
using the correct instrument, never the fingers. Any sharps injury should be managed
and reported to occupational health according to local policy.



Waste disposal
Parker (1999) explains that theatre design should incorporate a sequence of clean zones
from the entrance to the operating area, to allow easy movement of staff from one clean
area to another. Conversely, waste and contaminated items should be removed through
‘dirty’ areas without passing through clean areas. Body fluids collected in suction bottles
should be treated with a gelling agent and allowed to solidify before being double-
wrapped to prevent leakage (see case study, Box 2), as should waste tissue and bone
fragments. All clinical waste (placed in yellow bags) should be labelled with the date,
theatre number and case number to allow traceability.
From an environmental point of view, machines are now available that use microwaves
to make used materials safe for disposal in landfill sites. Normal rubbish should be
placed in black bags and disposed of in landfill sites to avoid incineration and minimise
air pollution.
1.2.6.4 Learning Activities
1.2.6.4.1 Case study
A junior staff reports to you, theatre manager, with complaints of having sustained a
deep cut while clearing cutting instruments following an orthopedic surgery. What will
be your response?
1.2.6.4.2 Field Visit to Theatre
Objectives of the visit
To follow Safety measures in accordance with Occupational Safety & health Act
standards
To set Operation theatre according to Standard Operation Procedures and workplace
policy
To document Operation theatre safety measures according to workplace policy
To write Incident report as per workplace policy
To dispose waste with due regard to environment protection regulations


Self-Assessment
You are provided with the following questions for self -assessment, attempt them
and check your responses
What four aspects does Occupational Safety and Health (OSH) target?
Describe the responsibility of an organization’s management in OSH?
What is the specific responsibility of an employee in OSH
What are three (3) factors guide the layout of an operation theatre?
What activities are the sub areas of Unrestricted/ Clean zone or clean area?
Why is it important to take surgical counts before skin closure in an operation?
What documentation should be made on the clinical waste to ensure theatre safety?
What is the difference between decontamination and sterilization?


Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials
Waste disposal bins
Sharps boxes
Decontamination solutions
Decontamination boxes


References
Joanna Kotcher Fuller. (2013). Surgical Technology: Principles And Practice. 6th ed. St.
Louis, Mo.: Elsevier.
AORN. (2007). Association of PeriOperative Registered Nurses (AORN) standards,
recommended practice, and guidelines. Denver: Author.
Joint Commission. (2008). 2009 National patient safety goals. Available at:
www.jointcommission.org/PatientSafety/NationalPatientSafetyGoals
World Health Organization. (2008). New checklist to help make surgery safer. WHO
Bulletin, 86(7), 496–576.
Association of periOperative Registered Nurses (AORN): Recommended practices for
hand antisepsis/hand-scrubs. In Standards, recommended practices and guidelines,
Denver, 2011, AORN.
Ministry of Health (2014). Occupational safety and Health policy guidelines for Health
sector in Kenya.
Phillips, N. F., & Berry, E. C. (2013). Berry & Kohn's operating room technique. 12th
ed. St. Louis, Mo.: Elsevier.
World                     Health                  Organization                     (2020).
https://www.who.int/medical_devices/priority/COVID_19_PPE/en/
Association of Surgical Technologists: Recommended standard of practice for counts
(effective       2006).            Accessed    November          29,       2020,        at
http://www.ast.org/pdf/Standards_of_Practice/RSOP_Counts.pdf.
Association of periOperative Registered Nurses (AORN): Recommended practices for
prevention of retained surgical items. In AORN Perioperative Standards and
Recommended Practices, 2011 edition, Denver,2011, AORN.
Joint Commission: Facts about the universal protocol. Accessed November 30, 2020, at
http://www.jointcommission.org/ facts_about_the_universal_protocol.


RESPONSES
What four aspects does Occupational Safety and Health (OSH) target?
The protection and promotion of workers health by preventing and controlling
occupational diseases and accidents
The development and promotion of healthy and safe work, work environments and work
organizations
Enhancement of physical, mental and social well-being of workers; and
Enabling workers to conduct socially and economically productive lives and to
contribute positively to sustainable development (WHO 2010).
Describe the responsibility of an organization’s management in OSH
To ensure that the Occupational Safety and Health Policy, Organizational
Responsibilities and the detailed arrangements concerning the health, safety and welfare
of all members of staff, clients, contractors, visitors and students are made known and
implemented in theatre
To review the written statement of the general policy with respect to safety and health in
the workplace;
To carry out suitable and sufficient risk assessment to safety and health of members of
staff students and others who within their area of responsibility may be affected by
activities in the health sector.
Where hazards are identified which cannot be eliminated, the manager will ensure that
safe systems of work are designed and implemented, recorded, monitored and reviewed
as necessary and results of the assessments are disseminated to the relevant persons;
Will carry out suitable and sufficient risk assessment to safety and health of members of
staff students and others who within their area of responsibility may be affected by
activities in the health sector.
Where hazards are identified which cannot be eliminated, the manager will ensure that
safe systems of work are designed and implemented, recorded, monitored and reviewed
as necessary and results of the assessments are disseminated to the relevant persons;
Will investigate all accidents, incidents or near misses concerning health and safety with
the view to identifying the cause(s) and preventing a recurrence;
Will participate in regular Occupations and Safety inspections of their            areas of
responsibility in accordance with agreed procedures
What is the specific responsibility of an employee in OSH
Ensure their own safety, health, and that of persons who may be affected by their act of
commission or omission.
Cooperate with the employer and co-workers in their workplace to ach safe and healthy
work environment by following OSH policy guidelines and standard operating
procedures
Make themselves familiar with the OSH policy guidelines
Use PPE as provided by employer to prevent risk to his/her safety and health
Comply with safety and health Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs)
Report to the supervisor of possible hazards
What three (3) factors guide te layout of an operation theatre?
environmental control
traffic control
desire to prevent surgical site infection (SSI).
What activities are the sub areas of Unrestricted/ Clean zone or clean area?
Stores
equipment store room
maintenance workshop
Kitchenette
firefighting device room
Why is it important to take surgical counts before skin closure in an operation?
This is to ensure no foreign body remains in a patient after closure of a wound..
What documentation should be made on the clinical waste to ensure theatre safety?
It should be labelled with the date, theatre number and case number to allow traceability.
  What is the difference between decontamination and sterilization?
  Decontamination is the process of elimination of pathogens except the spore from
  inanimate things while sterilization is the process that eliminates all micro-organisms
  such as bacteria, viruses, fungi and parasites, including bacterial endospores.




                                    CHAPTER NINE

                  PREVENTION OF NOSOCOMIAL INFECTION

  Unit of learning code- HE/CU/TT/CR/02/6/A

  Related Unit of Competency in Occupational Standard: Prevent Nosocomial
  Infections Introduction to the unit of learning

  This unit describes the competencies required to Prevent Nosocomial Infections.

  This unit describes the competencies required to prevent and control nosocomial
  infections. It involves handling Operation Theatre instruments and patients in the
  Operation Theatre room. Necessary precautions are taken in the context of theatre setting
  to avoid infections.

  Summary of Learning Outcomes
1. Prepare surgical instruments
2. Prepare patient for surgery
3. Dispose theatre waste


Learning Outcome 1 Prepare surgical instruments

Introduction to the learning outcome

This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to plan for Prevent
Nosocomial Infections. It includes:

    Infection prevention
    Personal OT protective gears
    Sterilization
    Decontamination
    Waste management
    Aseptic techniques
    Types of surgical instruments
    Types of surgical packs and sets
    Types of surgery
    Sterilization in Operation Theatre
    Safety practices in Operation Theatre
    Packing of surgical instruments
    Theatre layout
    Laminar flow in Operation Theatre
Performance Standard
   1. Instruments and packs are decontaminated using detergents according to
      manufacturer’s instructions, laid down policies and WHO standards
   2. Instruments and packs are packed according to surgical procedure manual
   3. Instruments and packs are sterilized according to WHO standards
   4. Surgical packs and instruments are selected according to the surgical procedure to
      be done and WHO
   5. Laminar flow system is operated as per the recommended manufacturers’
      instruction

1.2.1.3 Information Sheet

Infection prevention

Infection prevention is a scientific approach and practical solution designed to prevent
harm caused by infection to patients and health workers.
Personal OT protective gears

These are physical barriers used to prevent transmission of infection to the patient or
from the patient to the persons attending them. They include Gloves, Gowns/Aprons,
Surgical masks, Protective eyewear, Headgear and Boots.

Gowns and Aprons

These should be made of waterproof material and worn full size to give maximum
protection.

They should be used when splashing of blood or other body fluids or when any other
potentially infectious materials are anticipated.

Gloves

Provide a barrier against potentially infectious microorganisms in blood, other body
fluids, and medical waste, thus lowering the risk of transmitting infections to both health
care workers and patients. Sterile surgical gloves should be worn during all procedures in
which the main aim is to avoid introduction of pathogens into the patient, for example
during surgical procedures. Single use examination gloves should be worn for all
procedures in which the healthcare worker will be in contact with intact mucous
membranes.

Masks and Eye Shields

These provide some protection against airborne pathogens and shield against splashes.

Headgear and Boots

Caps are worn full length to cover the head. Boots and shoe covers should be waterproof
Sterilization

Sterilization Processes by which all pathogenic and non-pathogenic microorganisms,
including endospores, are killed. This term refers only to a validated process capable of
destroying all forms of microbial life, including endospores. The sterilizer is a piece of
equipment used to attain either physical or chemical sterilization. The agent used must be
capable of killing all forms of microorganisms.

Decontamination

Cleaning reusable items with an approved sporicidal disinfectant to render the item safe
for handling. Decontamination of instrumentation is performed in a designated area by
specially trained personnel immediately after completion of the surgical procedure. The
scrub person can facilitate the instrument decontamination process by wiping instruments
as they are used on the sterile field and then opening the instruments completely before
placing in a tray for return to the processing area. This is referred to as point of use
cleaning. An enzymatic cleaner such as a foam or solution can applied to the instruments
to prevent debris from drying during transport to the central service area. All instruments
on the table during a surgical procedure require decontamination before processing to the
required level of safety for patient use.

Decontamination combines mechanical or manual cleaning and a physical or chemical
microbicidal process. Prerinsing, washing, rinsing, and disinfecting/sterilizing is done in
the processing department to render the instrumentation safe for handling. This part of the
process is referred to as thorough cleaning or return-to-use cleaning.

Waste management

Health care waste is a potential reservoir of pathogenic microorganisms and requires
appropriate, safe, and reliable handling. Safe management of health care waste is a key
issue in controlling and reducing HAIs. There should be a person or persons responsible
for the organization and management (collection, storage, and disposal) of waste. Waste
management should be conducted in coordination with the infection-control team.

Purpose of proper waste management
    Protect people who handle waste items from accidental injury
    Prevent the spread of infection to patients, clients, and HCWs
    Prevent the spread of infection to the local community
    Safely dispose of hazardous materials
Categorization of health care waste

   1. Infectious waste (e.g., tissues, materials, or equipment that have been in contact
       with blood or other body fluids).
   2. Pathological waste (e.g., tissues, organs, body parts, blood, infected animals from
       laboratories, and body fluids).
   3. Sharps (e.g., needles, hypodermic needles, scalpels, and other blades, knives,
       infusion sets, saws, and broken glass)
   4. Pharmaceutical waste (e.g., expired, spilt, and contaminated pharmaceutical
       products, discarded bottles or boxes with residues, and drug vials).
   5. Radioactive waste includes solid, liquid, and gaseous materials contaminated with
       radionuclide.
   6. Genotoxic/cytotoxic waste may include certain cytotoxic drugs often used in
       cancer therapy, vomit, urine or feces from patients treated with cytotoxic drugs,
       chemicals, and radioactive material.
   7. Chemical waste consists of discarded solid, liquid, and gaseous chemicals (e.g.,
       from diagnostic and experimental work and from cleaning, housekeeping, and
       disinfecting procedures).
   8. Waste with heavy metal content includes waste containing mercury, cadmium,
       lead, and drugs containing arsenic, among others.
   9. Non-infectious/general waste includes waste generated from offices, kitchens,
       packaging material, and from stores. It is similar to domestic waste.
   10. Other wastes generated from health care settings include:
    Electronic waste.
    Construction waste.
    Obsolete equipment/furniture.

Principles of Waste Management

Key steps in the management of health care waste are as follows:

1. Waste minimization

2. Segregation (separation)

3. Collection

4. Transportation

5. Storage
6. Treatment

7. Disposal
Aseptic techniques

The methods by which microbial contamination is contained in the environment are
referred to as aseptic technique.

Some key elements of asepsis include the following :

Items have been cleaned and decontaminated so they are safe to handle with clean, bare
hands.

Items in use in patient care are handled with examination gloves for the protection of
both the caregiver and the patient.

Items have been cleaned, decontaminated, disinfected, or terminally sterilized without a
wrapper, and stored in a clean, dry place.

Items may start out sterile but are not maintained or used under sterile conditions. Skin
preps may be packaged sterile, but skin cannot be sterilized. The process is aseptic.

Contamination is contained. Extraneous contamination is avoided.

Items are set up on clean towels or drapes and used with examination gloves.

Items are not sterile or maintained sterile during use. Extraneous contamination is
avoided.

Disposable items are not cleaned and reused for another patient.

Items are classified as semicritical or noncritical by Spaulding’s classification of the
importance of patient care items.

Items can be used outside the confines of the restricted area.

Items are used on intact skin or mucous membranes.

Items are not used when the patient’s vascular system will be entered.

Types of surgical instruments

Classes of instrument by function

Cutting instruments and dissecting
Grasping or holding instruments

Hemostatic instruments.

Retractors

Tissue unifying instruments and materials: needle holders, surgical needles, staplers, clips

Instruments used for dissecting and cutting

They have sharp edges. They are used to dissect, incise, separate or excise tissue. They
should be kept separate from other instruments. Examples:

Scalpels, knives, scissors

       Types of Scissors

Blades may be straight, angled or curved.

It may also be pointed or blunt at the tip

To maintain the sharpness scissors should be used for intended purpose

Sutures scissors-Used to cut sutures and supplies. have blunt points to avoid cutting
structures near the suture

Tissue /dissecting scissors-Most have sharp blades .curved or angled blade are needed

mayo scissors- they are curved used to cut heavy tissues

Metzbaum(metz)- used to cut delicate tissues

Wire scissors- have short heavy blades. They are used to cut stainless steel sutures

Dressing/bandage scissors- used to cut drains, dressing.

Bone cutters/ debulking tools-They are suitable for cutting into or through a bone and
cartilages. They include chisel, osteomes, gauges, rasps and files

Curette- tissue / bone is removed by scrapping with sharp edge of the loop

Grasping and holding
Tissues should be grasped and held in a position so that the surgeon can perform the
desired manoeuvre without injuring the surrounding tissue.

Dissecting forceps

Smooth/thumb forceps- resemble tweezers.They have serrations at the tip used for
grasping delicate tissues

Toothed forceps- have single tooth on one side that fits perfectly between the teeth on the
opposite side. Provide firm hold on tough tissue i.e skin

Allis forceps- each jaw curves slightly inward and there is raw of teeth at the end

Babecock- the end of jaw is rounded section and fenestrated. Used in grasping delicate
tissue

cocker

Tenaculums- curved or angled points at the end of jaws. Penetrate tissues to grasp firmly

Stone forceps- used to grasp calculi

Bone holders used to stabilise the bone

Clamping and occluding

They are used to apply pressure. Mostly used for clamping blood vessels

Haemostats/artery forceps- have either straight or curved jaws. Have serrations that goes
across the jaws.

Crushing clamps- used to crash or clamp blood vessels

Non-crashing clamps- used to occlude major blood vessels temporarily which minimizes
tissue trauma

Exposing and retracting

They hold organs and tissues away from surgical site so that the surgeon can see clearly
and Can have room to operate EXAMPLES
Handled retractors- they have a blade on handle. They are used in pairs and are used by
first and second assistant i.e malleable- may bent to desired angle or length

Hooks- they are used to retract delicate tissues

Self retaining retractors- holding device with two or more blades. Can be inserted to
spread the edges of an incision and hold them apart.

Viewing

Used for viewing interior body cavities, hollow organs and structures and include
speculum and endoscopies

Suctioning and aspirating

Blood, body fluids and irrigating solutions may be removed by mechanical suction or
manual aspiration

Types of surgical packs and sets

Classification of sets

Specific sets

General sets

Inspect each instrument before and after use to detect imperfections.

Set aside damaged instruments and send them for repair or replacement promptly.

Use instruments only for the purpose for which they are designed.

Handle instruments gently

Provide protection for delicate instruments

Clean instruments meticulously.

Keep oil away from instruments

Give instruments regular maintenance.
Take inventory

Rotate sterile instruments in order to use item according to expiring date

Sterile packs may be stored up to the expiry date

Types of surgery

Surgery is defined as the art of science of treating diseases, injuries and deformities by
operations and instrumentations

Classification of surgery

Elective-Does not require urgent intervention, it is planned and performed when patient
chooses.

Urgent -Necessary for patient’s health. Is indicated to prevent additional health problems
from occurring

Emergency-Performed immediately to save the individual’s life or preserve function of a
body part

Required-Patient needs to have surgery, Plan within a few weeks or month i.e Prostatic
hyperplasia without bladder obstruction, Cataracts

Optional-Decision rests with patient and it is a Personal preference i.e Cosmetic surgery

Sterilization in Operation Theatre

Bacterial endospores (e.g., clostridia and bacillus) are the most resistant of all living
organisms because of their capacity to withstand external destructive agents. Although
the physical or chemical process by which all pathogenic and non-pathogenic
microorganisms (including endospores) are destroyed is not absolute, supplies and
equipment are considered sterile when all

parameters have been met during a sterilization process.

Reliability Parameters for Sterilization

Two types of parameters are considered for the reliability of sterilizing methods: product-
associated parameters and process-associated parameters.
Product-Associated Parameters

Bioburden. The degree of contamination with microorganisms and organic debris

Bioresistance. Factors such as heat and/or moisture sensitivities and product stability

Biostate. The nutritional, physical, and/or reproductive phase of microorganisms

Bioshielding. Characteristics of the packaging materials

Density. Factors affecting penetration and evacuation of the agent

Process-Associated Parameters

Temperature

Humidity/moisture/hydration

Time

Purity of the agent and air, and the residual effects or residues

Saturation/penetration

Capacity of the sterilizer and the position of items within the chamber

Methods of Sterilization

Reliable sterilization depends on the contact of the sterilizing agent with all surfaces of
the item to be sterilized. Selection of the agent used to achieve sterility depends primarily
on the nature of

the item to be sterilized. The time required to kill endospores in the available equipment
then becomes critical. Sterilization processes are either physical or chemical, and each
method has its

advantages and disadvantages. The following are available sterilizing agents (sterilants):

1. Thermal (physical)

a. Steam under pressure/moist heat
b. Hot air/dry heat

2. Chemical

a. Ethylene oxide gas

b. Formaldehyde gas and solution

c. Hydrogen peroxide plasma/vapor

d. Ozone gas

e. Acetic acid solution

f. Glutaraldehyde solution

g. Peracetic acid 0.2% solution

h. Hypochlorous acid (electrochemical conversion process)

3. Radiation (physical)

a. Microwave (nonionizing)

b. X-ray (ionizing)

Sterilization Cycle

The time required to achieve sterilization is referred to as the process cycle, which
includes the following:

• Heat up and/or penetration of the agent

• Kill time (i.e., exposure to the agent)

• Safety factor for bioburden

• Evacuation or dissipation of the agent

Chemical Sterilizing Agents
The chemical agents used to sterilize heat-sensitive items can be toxic or can vaporize to
emit noxious fumes that are irritating to the eyes and nasal passages, even at low levels of
exposure.

Ethylene Oxide

Ethylene oxide (EO) is used in a gaseous form for sterilization and is a known mutagen
and carcinogen. The residual products can be toxic if there is direct contact with the skin
or the gas is inhaled. Exposure can cause dizziness, nausea, and vomiting. Ethylene
glycol and ethylene chlorohydrin are by products of a reaction with moisture, such as on
the hands. All porous items sterilized with EO should be aerated to dissipate the gas.

Formaldehyde

Formaldehyde may be used in a gaseous or liquid form. The vapors are toxic to the
respiratory tract. Formaldehyde is a potent allergen, mutagen, and carcinogen, and it can
cause liver toxicity.

Glutaraldehyde

Glutaraldehyde is the least toxic of the three sterilizing agents, but the fumes from the
liquid form may be irritating to the eyes, nose, and throat. Contact dermatitis and hives
have been reported. Glutaraldehyde should be used only in a closed container and in a
well-ventilated area.

Thermal Sterilization

Heat is a dependable physical agent for the destruction of all forms of microbial life,
including endospores. It may be used moist or dry. The most reliable and commonly used
method of sterilization is steam under pressure.

Steam Under Pressure (Moist Heat Sterilization)

Heat destroys microorganisms, and this process is hastened by the addition of moisture.
Steam in itself is inadequate for sterilization. Pressure that is greater than atmospheric
pressure is necessary to increase the temperature of steam for the thermal destruction of
microbial life. Moist heat in the form of steam under pressure causes the denaturation and
coagulation of protein or the enzyme protein system within cells. Direct saturated steam
contact is the basis of the steam sterilization process. For a specified time and at a
required temperature, the steam must penetrate every fiber and reach every surface of the
items to be sterilized. When steam enters the sterilizer chamber under pressure, it
condenses on contact with cold items. This condensation liberates heat, simultaneously
heating and wetting all items in the load and thereby providing the two requisites:

moisture and heat. This sterilization process is spoken of in terms of degrees of
temperature and time of exposure—not in terms of pounds of pressure. Pressure increases
the boiling temperature of water but in itself has no significant effect on microorganisms
or steam penetration.

Exposure time depends on the size and contents of the load and the temperature within
the sterilizer. At the end of the cycle, reevaporation of water condensate must effectively
dry contents of the load to maintain sterility; the water is dried from the sterilized pack or
item.

The vegetative forms of most microorganisms are killed in a few minutes at temperatures
ranging from 130° F to 150° F (54° C-65° C); however, bacterial endospores will
withstand a temperature of 240° F (115° C) for more than 3 hours. No living thing can
survive direct exposure to saturated steam at 250° F (121° C) for longer than 15 minutes.
As the temperature of the steam is increased, the time of exposure may be decreased. A
minimum temperature-time relationship is maintained throughout all portions of the load
to accomplish effective sterilization.

Advantages of Steam Sterilization

Steam sterilization is the easiest, safest, and surest method of onsite sterilization. Heat-
and moisture-stable items that can be steam sterilized without damage should be
processed with this method.

Steam is the fastest method; its total time cycle is the shortest.

Steam is the least expensive and most easily supplied agent. It is piped in from the
facility’s boiler room. An automatic, electrically powered steam generator can be
mounted beneath the sterilizer for emergency standby when steam pressure is low.

Most sterilizers have automatic controls and recording devices that eliminate the human
factor from the sterilization process as much as possible when operated and cared for
according to the recommendations of the manufacturer.

Steam leaves no harmful residue. Many items such as stainless steel instruments
withstand repeated processing without damage.

Disadvantages of Steam Sterilization
Precautions must be use used in preparing and packaging items, loading and operating the
sterilizer, and drying the load.

Items need to be clean, free of grease and oil, and not sensitive to heat.

Steam must have direct contact with all areas of an item. It must be able to penetrate
packaging material, but the material must be able to maintain sterility.

The timing of the cycle is adjusted for differences in materials and sizes of loads; these
variables are subject to human error.

Steam may not be pure. Steam purity refers to the amount of solid, liquid, or vapor
contamination in steam. Impurities can cause wet or stained packs and stained
instruments.

Dry Heat Sterilization

Dry heat in the form of hot air is used primarily to sterilize anhydrous oils, petroleum
products, and talc, which steam and ethylene oxide gas cannot penetrate. The destruction
of microbial life

by dry heat is a physical oxidation or slow burning process that involves coagulating the
protein in cells. Higher temperatures are required in the absence of moisture because the
microorganisms

are destroyed through a very slow process of heat absorption by conduction. Dry heat
sterilizers are not commonly found in the OR processing areas. Dry heat is commonly
used in dental suites.

Advantages of Dry Heat Sterilization

Hot air penetrates certain substances that cannot be sterilized by steam sterilization or
another method.

Dry heat is a protective method of sterilizing some delicate, sharp, or cutting-edge
instruments. Steam may erode or corrode cutting edges.

Disadvantages of Dry Heat Sterilization

A long exposure period is required, because hot air penetrates slowly and possibly
unevenly.
The time and temperature required will vary for different substances.

Overexposure may ruin some substances.

Safety practices in Operation Theatre

Surgical care is a fundamental part of healthcare around the globe. Ensuring surgical
safety in operation theatres is the need of the hour. A safe operating theatre is achieved
only through careful planning, maintenance and periodic checks, as well as proper
ongoing training for staff. An operating theatre is a complex system with numerous risk
factors, including not only the features of the structure and its fixtures, but also the
management and behaviour of healthcare workers. Safe surgeries ensure less morbidity
and mortality, improved quality of work, less liability, and greater efficiency.




There is increasing evidence that to achieve the full benefit of the checklist, there needs
to be an understanding of, and a strategy for, mitigating the technical, socio-political, and
psychological barriers to using the checklist. Freestanding surgical units may need to be
particularly vigilant in ensuring that personnel and equipment are in good condition for
surgery. Protocols and procedures to identify and manage stress and fatigue in surgical
personnel may help to avoid surgical errors and patient injuries. The operating room is an
appropriate educational environment, but the presence of observers at any level must not
be allowed to compromise patient safety. Patient safety in surgery demands skilled
individuals using well-functioning equipment under adequate supervision.
Modern Issues of Patient Safety

Medical errors are inescapable in healthcare profession. The identification of causes and
implementation of safety plans to reduce these errors will help to establish an effective
patient safety in operation theatres. The causes advocated by WHO are enlisted below:

• Lack of continuous training and education

• Past tolerance of unsafe practice

• Lack of regulations /rules

• Gaps in communication among different healthcare providers

• Gaps in communications between healthcare providers and patients

• Unstable /unreliable systems

• Fear of admission of guilt / wrong doing

• Human factors




Special Considerations for Surgical Procedures

Procedure Scheduling

Scheduling the procedure is very important and is a form of OT planning. All surgery
requests should be made in writing and verbal requests by the medical staff should be
avoided to prevent any errors in scheduling the procedure. Verification of every
document including consent, history, and surgeon orders at the time of scheduling is
necessary. Electronic medical records improve the safety process, decreases
misunderstandings and missing documents.




Pre-operative measures to prevent errors

A preoperative check up by the concerned doctor gives an added opportunity to correct
any mistakes and inconsistencies in the documentation. All discrepancies should be
mended at this step before proceeding further with surgical procedure. The informed
consent should be duly signed before the procedure. Patient should be explained about
the surgical procedure, associated complications, additional procedures, placement of
foreign material (Meshes, Plates, Screws, Stents). The next approach is to mark the site of
the procedure to avoid wrong site surgery. The formulated guidelines for marking the site
are; involving the patient while performing site marking, to be marked by a licensed
practitioner who is responsible for the procedure and the marks should be unambiguous
and uniform within the institution and should be semi-permanent to be visible after skin
preparation and draping.

The institution should have a written process to ensure that the correct site is operated on.
Alternatively, radiopaque markers can be used in the procedures involving fluoroscopy.
Surgical armamentarium (e.g. required instruments, guide wires, laser fibres, scopes,
stents, loops, prosthesis, etc.) should be verified prior to procedure.




In OT Just Before the Commencement of Surgery

Implementation of safety checklist as proposed by WHO is the main objective at this
stage. This helps in improving the outcomes. The timeout is a critical advantage to pause
and be sure that the team is aligned about what is being done to whom in which location,"
Double- and triple-checking a patient's surgical information is worth the extra time to
avoid errors. Conduction of timeouts on electronic white boards ensures correct patient
identification, site marking, draping and other essential elements are followed. The
collaboration of team members in this task is essential at every step for smooth work up.
In the modern age of medicine, digital images, displaying the CT-scan, X-rays on an
auxiliary monitor during the procedure act as a guide for surgeons and improve patient
safety.

The consequences of positioning related injuries are preventable but can be profound and
can result in morbidity, and litigation. Neurological, vascular, musculoskeletal, and
pressure ulcers are the most common position related injuries in surgical patients.
Neurological complications can be avoided by placing forearms in neutral position or
slightly supinated to minimise pressure in the cubital tunnel. It is advised to strap and
place them adequately to maintain the correct limb position during the procedure even if
the surgical table is moved. The patient’s head should be placed in a neutral position and
the arm should not exceed abduction of more than 90° to avoid brachial plexus injury.
Straps should not be too tight to prevent ischemia and compartmental syndrome. Padding
under osseous prominences can help avoid pressure-related complications. Surgeons must
be observant to avoid possible compartment syndrome (limbs) when positioning patients
for open, endoscopic, and laparoscopic surgeries.




Collection of Biopsies and Surgical Specimens

A large amount of patients, multiple samples from the same patient, lack of staff, and
lack of continuous education and training of healthcare workers account for medical
errors. Documentation, writing policies and protocols detailing responsibilities makes the
task simpler and avoid errors. To make the process as simple as possible, reducing the
number of steps between collecting the samples and receiving the laboratory report
should be encouraged.

Procedures that involve biopsy and tissue sampling a specimen may pass through the
hands of more than twenty individuals in several workplaces until the final pathology
report is given. These handoffs significantly increase the risk of a mix-up and can lead to
serious diagnostic errors. Mutual cooperation for supervision of clinicians, technicians,
and administrative assistants is essential to prevent and detect errors. The most precarious
steps of the biopsy process include labelling of the specimens, appropriate request forms,
and accessioning of biopsy specimens. The modern methods for data entry, automated
systems for patient identification and specimen labeling, as well as two or more
identifiers during sample collection are important steps to reduce misidentification. If
misidentification is detected, rejection then recollection is the most suitable approach to
manage the specimen. The introduction of innovative methods DNA analysis to assist
with correct identification can be used when recollection is not available.

Postoperative Discharge Work up

Planning a discharge has been shown to influence patient outcomes; patient safety can
prevent readmissions and improve patient satisfaction. Patient education (Postoperative
instruction charts) is when they are discharged home with catheters, stomas, stents,
drains, or any other medical device that needs special care. Patient education can reduce
complications and improve their quality of life after surgical procedures. Healthcare
workers must be aware that language barriers, socioeconomic status, and age can impact
patient comprehension of instructions.




Medication Safety During Administration

Medication safety is ensured by applying the five R’s: right drug, right route, right time,
right dose, and right patient. Medication errors are barriers that prevent the right patient
from receiving the right drug in the right dose at the right time through the right route of
administration at any stage during medication use, with or without the occurrence of
adverse drug events.

 Modern systems of information technology, such as computerised order entry, automated
dispensing, barcode medication administration, electronic medication reconciliation, and
personal health records are essential in the prevention of medication errors. Electronic
medical records help in rapidly screening the medication regimens of hospitalised
patients and deliver timely, point-of-care intervention when indicated.

The most common prescribing errors are incorrect drug, incorrect dose, allergies, and
drug-drug interaction. It is important to tailor prescriptions for individual patients,
identifying allergies, pregnancy, lactation, age, co-morbidities. Healthcare workers must
be familiar with the medications they prescribe and need to know the medications in their
specialty that are associated with high risk of detrimental effects. Drug interactions can
lead to serious adverse events or decrease drug efficacy. Prescribing health-care workers
should ask patients of any use of over-the-counter medications or dietary supplements
because they are frequently under reported and may cause drug interactions. Prescribing
the generic name of drugs simplifies the communication among healthcare workers,
reducing errors. However, patients need to be educated that their medication may be
called by different names (brand and generic name) and they should be encouraged to
keep a list of their medications, including both the brand and generic name of each drug.

Packing of surgical instruments

To be effective, the sterilizing agent must come into direct contact with all surfaces of
every instrument. Therefore instruments must be packaged (individually or in sets) in
such a way to allow adequate exposure to the sterilant, prevent air from being trapped and
moisture from being retained during the sterilization process, and ensure sterile transfer
to the sterile field.The majority of surgical instruments are made of stainless steel and can
be sterilized by steam under pressure. Effective steam sterilization involves the direct
contact of all surfaces with steam and the revaporization of water condensate to produce a
dry, sterile instrument.

Instrument Packaging

For sterilizing and transporting, instruments are put in a closed container or wrapped
individually. Instruments placed in open trays are wrapped as sets. Instruments may be
sterilized unwrapped in a high-speed steam sterilizer immediately before use (not
recommended), may be prepared in advance as for a case cart, or may be retained in
sterile core storage until needed.

Packaging Considerations

The packaging materials for all methods of sterilization should do the following:

Permit penetration of the sterilizing agent to achieve sterilization of all items in the
package.

Allow the release of the sterilizing agent at the end of the exposure period and allow
adequate drying or aerating.

Withstand the physical conditions of the sterilizing process.
Maintain integrity of the package at varying atmospheric and humidity levels. In dry
climates or at high altitudes, some packaging materials are susceptible to rupture during
sterilization or dry out and crack in storage.

Provide an impermeable barrier to microorganisms, dust particles, and moisture after
sterilization. Items must remain sterile from the time they are removed from the sterilizer
until they are used.

Cover items completely and easily and fasten securely with adhesive strip or a heat seal
that cannot be resealed after opening. Seal integrity should be tamperproof. A margin of
at least 1 inch (2.5 cm) is considered a standard for safety on all sealed packages. Scissors
should not be used to cut off the end of a package. Contents cannot be drawn out over
this cut end because the contents would be contaminated by the edge of the packaging
material. For the same reason, packages are never torn open below a seal.

Resist tears and punctures in handling. If accidental tears and holes do occur, they must
be visible.

Identification of the contents and the chemical indicator evidence of exposure to a
sterilizing agent should be placed on a label that is visible on the outside of the package.

Be free of toxic ingredients and nonfast dyes.

Be lint-free or low-linting.

Protect the contents from physical damage.

Permit easy removal of the contents with transfer to the sterile field without
contamination or delamination (separation into layers).

Be economical.

Packages should be wrapped far enough away from sterile storage areas so that mixing
sterile and nonsterile packages is not possible. Cabinets that contain nonsterile items
should be labelled conspicuously. A procedure for sending items to and receiving items
from the sterilizer should be set up so that sterile and nonsterile packages can never be
confused en route. This procedure

must be understood by everyone.
Packages may be wrapped with nonwoven or woven materials sequentially in two layers.
Double-thickness wrapping in one layer without using the sequential method is also
acceptable. The wrappers can be stitched around the edges or bonded/fused together.
Aseptic presentation to the sterile field is the prime consideration. Each facility should
determine which method and material is best suited to the clinical environment.

Video link on packaging of surgical instruments

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FF5D6flcra0




Theatre layout

The overall floor plan of the surgical suite is divided into three areas or zones, which are
directly or indirectly involved with the operative procedure equipment, supplies, and
personnel.

For descriptive purposes the zones represent the type of activities, dress code, or
restriction for that zone. Each person working within the suite must abide by policies
related to the zones.

The Three - Zone Concept

The outer zone - The unrestricted area

Provides an entrance and exit from the surgical suite for personnel, equipment and
patients.

Street clothes are permitted in this area, and the area provides access to communicate
with personnel within and without the suite.

This zone should contain:

A main access door;

An accessible area for the removal of waste;

A sluice;

Storage for medical and surgical supplies;
An entrance to the changing facilities

The clean or semi-restricted zone

Provides access to the procedure room and peripheral support areas within the surgical
unit.

Personnel entering this area must be in proper theatre attire.

Traffic control must be designed to prevent violation of this area by unauthorized
personnel or persons improperly attired for this zone.

This zone contains:

The sterile supplies store;

An anesthetic room;

A recovery area (PACU);

A clean corridor;

Rest rooms for the staff.

Aseptic or restricted area

This area should be restricted to the working team.

Staff working in this area should change into theatre clothes, should wear masks and
gowns, and, where necessary, should wear sterile gloves

This area includes:

The operating theatre;

A scrub-up area;

The sterile preparation room (preparation of sterile surgical instruments and equipment)

DEPARTMENTAL LAYOUT
Reception area- this the first part of theatre in which the patient come in contact with.
The area must create pleasant impression in order to allay anxiety. The area should be
large enough in order to allow patient to be transferred from ward stretcher to theatre
stretcher Facilities such as telephones and tables for reception staff should be included.
Patient are admitted to theatre via this area and checking of various requirement for
patient is done.

Holding area-it is a special area inside or adjacent to surgical room. It should be located
near reception area. Final identification and assessment before patient is transferred into
the operating room. Minor procedures can also be performed i.e inserting catheters, i.v
lines. It serves as admission, observation and discharge area.

Scrub room- it is where scrubbing is done to avoid splashing of water which may
contaminate the operating room

 Operating room- It’s a unique acute setting removed from other clinical units. It is
controlled geographically, bacteriologically and environmentally. It is restricted in terms
of inflow and outflow of personnel. Several methods have been used to prevent
transmission of infections i.e Dust collecting surfaces i.e open shelves are made of
materials that are resistant to corroding of strong disinfectants. Temperatures are
controlled at a range of 20-24 and humidity at 30%-60%. Communication system
provides a means of delivery of routine and emergency messages.

5. Anaesthetic room-Should be large enough to accommodate patient trolley, anaesthetic
machine and staff movement. Lockable cupboards should be used to accommodate
scheduled and controlled drugs, Piped o2, nitrous oxide should be incorporated in the
design

Recovery room/ post anaesthetic care unit (PACU)- the goal is to provide total care to
postoperative patient. Staff must be vigilant have knowledge on post-operative and post-
anaesthesia complications, resuscitation equipment must be available, general lighting,
ventilation and must be efficient. Hand washing facilities are essential

Theatre changing room- this is where surgeons nurses and theatre staff change into
theatre gowns

Packing area- instruments are packed according to their specification ready for
sterilization

Stores- linens, stationeries and theatre supplies are kept
Utility/sluice room- cleaning of equipment is done and sorting of soiled gowns,

Lounge- located outside operating room. this where surgeons, nursing staff ,anaesthetist
and students go to rest after the procedure

Sterilization room(CSSD)
Laminar flow in Operation Theatre

Laminar airflow is a high-pressure, unidirectional air-moving diffuser housed in a cluster
in a wall or ceiling enclosure. It is designed to flow uninterrupted from the cleanest area
to the less clean area into air return grilles in the lower sidewalls. Cool air from the
laminar diffuser travels more quickly than isothermic air. Care is taken to continually
monitor the patient’s temperature for any hypothermic effect. Hypothermia can support
the development of a surgical site infection (SSI).

The airflow is divided into tiny linear columns of cool clean air that generates little
velocity and blowing as it courses toward the sterile field. Objects that emit thermal
plume, such as spotlights, persons, or equipment, cause the air currents to move in a
different direction. Horizontal airflow passes from the wall diffuser to an opposite lower
return grille. Objects in the air pathway shed particulate into the clean airstream.

Vertical airflowstyles have fewer obstacles to the line of direction of the air. Vertical
downward airflow is designed to flow from the top of the room, over the patient, lights,
and equipment, and continue downward forming a canopy toward the lower corners of
the room where the air return grilles are located. Studies have shown an 89% reduction in
colony-forming units when vertical laminar air flow is used appropriately. This includes
making sure that the open instrument tables are well within the confines of the airflow
canopy. One additional consideration is when the surgeon and team are directly over the
patient to view the surgical site. Particulate from the nonsterile head/cap/mask and neck
are passed directly into the sterile field depositing cells into the patient.

Obstacles to Laminar Airflow Effectiveness

Objects that pass between the flow of clean air and the sterile field around the patient
shed particles that can contaminate the surgical site. Heat emanating and rising from the
team members, the patient, and equipment referred to as thermal plume changes the
course of the laminar flow. Several physical barriers and events that interrupt airflow and
return include the following:

Spotlights over the field

Ceiling booms with surgical machinery and equipment

Mayo stands over the patient

Microscopes, articulated laser arm, and C-arm
Personnel and patient thermal plume

Opening and closing the OR door (sliding and swinging doors; proportionately higher
with swinging doors)

Laminar airflow was first trialed during hip replacement surgery by Sir John Charnley in
Great Britain in the 1950s. Charnley believed that if particulate could be removed from
the air, the 7% infection rate could drop. His studies showed that the infection rate did
fall to less than 2%. Although the laminar system contributes to removing particulates,
the improvements in sterile technique and appropriate antibiotic therapy overall may have
a larger effect on infection rate. Research has shown that the particulate dispersal is
proportionate to the number of personnel in the room, the opening and closing of doors
(and their type), placement of instrument tables, and attire worn.
Learning Activities

Case study

The COVID-19 pandemic has infected more than 13 million people worldwide. Among
these, an estimated 570,000 healthcare workers have been infected worldwide and
approximately 600 in Kenya. Healthcare workers have been the main frontliners in
combating the corona virus and therefore require the utmost protection. With the numbers
of patients with the virus being on the rise, so are the number of operative cases with
coronavirus.

What are the standard precautions used by theater staff to protect themselves from corona
virus?

What is the correct sequence for donning PPE?

What is the correct sequence for doffing PPE?




1.2.1.4.2 Field Visit to Operating Theatre

Objectives of the visit

Decontaminate instruments after a surgical procedure

Prepare and pack instruments for steam sterilization

1.2.1.5 Self-Assessment

You are provided with the following questions for self -assessment, attempt them and
check your responses

What are the three types of gloves (3) found in theater?

What are three methods of sterilization?

What steps should be followed before assembling instruments for sterilization?

What are characteristics of an ideal packaging material for sterilizing instruments?
What is the purpose of proper waste management?

What are the two main types of laminar flow used in theatre?

What areas are found in the semi-restricted area in theatre?

What are five types of scissors found in theatre?




1.2.1.6 Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials

Functional OR

Sterile surgical gloves

Packaging material for sterilization

Decontaminant

Surgical mask

Surgical caps

Theatre scrub gown

Surgical boots

Posters on wearing and removal of PPE

Running water

Hand washing soap

Hand towels




1.2.1.7 References

Ministry of Health (2015). An Orientation Guide for Health Workers in Health Care
Waste Management. Nairobi
Phillips, N. F., & Berry, E. C. (2013). Berry & Kohn's operating room technique. 12th ed.
St. Louis, Mo.: Elsevier.

World Health Organization (2020).
https://www.who.int/medical_devices/priority/COVID_19_PPE/en/




RESPONSES

What are the three types of gloves (3) found in theater?

Sterile surgical gloves

Clean gloves

Heavy duty gloves

What are three methods of sterilization?

Thermal

Chemical

Radiation (physical)

What steps should be followed before assembling instruments for sterilization?

Instruments belonging to each set must have passed through terminal cleaning and
terminal sterilization before they are safe to handle.

Unless contraindicated, place an absorbent towel or foam in the bottom of the tray to
absorb condensate, as for a rigid container with vacuum valves. Include a biologic
indicator or chemical integrator in the tray.

Count instruments as they are placed in the tray, and record the number of each type.

Arrange the instruments in a definite pattern to protect them from damage and to
facilitate their removal for counting and use. Follow the instrument book or other listing
of instruments to be included.

Place heavy instruments, such as retractors, in the bottom of the tray.
Open the hinges and box locks on all hinged instruments.

 Place sharp and delicate instruments on top of other instruments. They can be separated
with an absorbent material or left in a sterilizing rack with the blades and tips suspended.
The blades of scissors, other cutting edges, and delicate tips should not touch other
instruments.

Place concave or cupped instruments with the cupped surfaces down so that water
condensate does not collect in them during steam sterilization and drying.

Disassemble all detachable parts. Some parts, such as screws and springs, can be put in a
peel pouch that is left open. Sealed pouches may not process correctly during the
sterilization process.

Separate dissimilar metals. For example, brass knife handles and malleable retractors
should be separated from stainless steel instruments. Preferably, put each metal in a
separate tray, or separate metals with absorbent material.

Place instruments with a lumen, such as a suction tip, in as near a horizontal position as
possible. These instruments should be tilted as little as possible to prevent trapped air or
the pooling of water condensate.

Distribute weight as evenly as possible in the tray. Some trays have dividers, clips, and
pins that attach to the bottom, which help prevent instruments from shifting and keep
them in alignment.

Wrap the tray, or place it in a rigid container. Check woven textile wrappers for holes or
abrasion. Sequentially double wrap in a woven or nonwoven material, or use a double
thickness wrap in a single-fold configuration.

Place a chemical indicator tab or tape on the outside wrapper or container for proof that
the package has been through the parameters necessary for sterilization.

 Label the sets appropriately with their intended use (e.g., basic set), the date sterilized,
and the process lot control number.

What are characteristics of an ideal packaging material for sterilizing instruments?

Permit penetration of the sterilizing agent to achieve sterilization of all items in the
package.
Allow the release of the sterilizing agent at the end of the exposure period and allow
adequate drying or aerating.

Withstand the physical conditions of the sterilizing process.

Maintain integrity of the package at varying atmospheric and humidity levels. In dry
climates or at high altitudes, some packaging materials are susceptible to rupture during
sterilization or dry out and crack in storage.

Provide an impermeable barrier to microorganisms, dust particles, and moisture after
sterilization. Items must remain sterile from the time they are removed from the sterilizer
until they are used.

Cover items completely and easily and fasten securely with adhesive strip or a heat seal
that cannot be resealed after opening.

5.     What is the purpose of proper waste management?

Protect people who handle waste items from accidental injury

Prevent the spread of infection to patients, clients, and HCWs

Prevent the spread of infection to the local community

Safely dispose of hazardous materials

6. What are the two main types of laminar flow used in theatre?

Horizontal airflow- passes from the wall diffuser to an opposite lower return grille

Vertical downward airflow - designed to flow from the top of the room, over the patient,
lights, and equipment, and continue downward forming a canopy toward the lower
corners of the room where the air return grilles are located

7.     What areas are found in the semi-restricted area in theatre?

The sterile supplies store;

An anesthetic room;

A recovery area (PACU);
A clean corridor;

Rest rooms for the staff.




8.     What are five types of scissors found in theatre?

Sutures scissors-Used to cut sutures and supplies. have blunt points to avoid cutting
structures near the suture

Tissue /dissecting scissors-Most have sharp blades .curved or angled blade are needed

mayo scissors- they are curved used to cut heavy tissues

Metzbaum(metz)- used to cut delicate tissues

Wire scissors- have short heavy blades. They are used to cut stainless steel sutures

Dressing/bandage scissors- used to cut drains, dressing.
    Learning Outcome 2 Participate in preparation of patient for surgery

Introduction to the learning outcome

This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to prepare patient
for surgery. It includes:

Identification and preparation of patient for surgery
Patient positions
Prepping and draping the patient
Operation Theatre Ethics
Maintaining Operation Theatre records

Performance Standard
   1. Patient is identified according to patient theatre checklist, file and identification
      band
   2. Patient is positioned on operation table according to procedure to be done
   3. Patient is prepped according to WHO standards
   4. PT records are maintained as per work place policy

Information Sheet

Identification and preparation of patient for surgery

Regardless of the physical setting in which an invasive or surgical procedure will be
performed, each patient should be adequately assessed and prepared so that the effects
and potential risks of the surgical intervention are minimized. This involves both physical
and emotional preparation. Perioperative caregivers should establish a baseline for the
patient’s preoperative condition so that changes occurring during the
perioperative/perianesthesia care period can be easily recognized.

Preoperative Preparation of All Patients

Specific activities such as the preoperative history and physical examination are
completed and documented before the patient arrives in the OR. This process can be
performed before admission to the hospital or ambulatory care facility; other activities are
performed when the patient arrives in the preadmission testing (PAT) area. The
preoperative physical preparation is designed to help all patients overcome the stresses of
anesthesia, pain, fluid and blood loss, immobilization, and tissue trauma. Preparation
often begins before the patient’s hospital admission, with the institution of nutritional or
drug therapy.

Preadmission Procedures

Some preoperative preparations can be performed in the surgeon’s office. Patients are
then referred to the preoperative testing center of the hospital or ambulatory care facility.
Tests and records should be completed and available before the patient is admitted the
day of the surgical procedure. Preadmission tests (PATs) are scheduled according to the
guidelines of each facility. Some tests are acceptable only for a 30-day period or are
repeated before admission. The type of testing performed depends on the patient’s known
or suspected condition and the complexity of the surgical procedure. The preoperative
preparations include:

Medical history and physical examination.

Allergies and sensitivities should be noted. The preoperative technician establishes the
baseline for the patient’s vital signs




Laboratory tests. Testing should be based on specific clinical indicators or risk factors
that could affect surgical management or anesthesia. Tests include age, sex, preexisting
disease, magnitude of surgical procedure, and type of anesthesia. Ideally these tests
should be completed 24 hours before admission so the results are available for review.
Some facilities perform laboratory studies the morning of the procedure.

Hemoglobin, hematocrit, blood urea nitrogen (BUN),and blood glucose may be routinely
tested for patients who are age 60 or older.

Hematocrit is usually ordered for women of all ages before the administration of a
general anesthetic.

Complete blood count and blood chemistry profile may be indicated. Differential, platelet
count, activated partial thromboplastin time, and prothrombin time tests also may be
ordered.

Urinalysis may be indicated by the type of surgical procedure, medical history, and/or
physical examination.

Blood type and crossmatch. If a transfusion is anticipated, the patient’s blood is typed and
crossmatched. Many patients prefer to have their own blood drawn and stored for
autotransfusion. Patients should be advised that blood banks charge an additional fee to
store and preserve autologous blood for personal use. Even if the patient is to have an
autotransfusion, his or her blood should still be typed and crossmatched in the event that
additional transfusions are needed. If the patient refuses to accept blood transfusions, the
appropriate documentation of refusal should be completed according to the policies and
procedures of the facility.

Chest x-ray. A preoperative chest x-ray study is not routinely required for all patients. It
may be required by facility policy or medically indicated as an adjunct to the clinical
evaluation of patients with cardiac or pulmonary disease and for smokers, patients age 60
years or older, and cancer patients.
Electrocardiogram (ECG). If the patient has known or suspected cardiac disease, an ECG
is mandatory. Depending on the policy of the facility, an ECG may be routine for patients
ages 40 years or older.




Diagnostic procedures. Special diagnostic procedures are performed when specifically
indicated (e.g., Doppler studies for vascular surgery).

Written instructions. The patient should receive written preoperative instructions to
follow before admission for the surgical procedure. The written literature should be
written with the patient’s literacy level in mind. Additional methods of instruction should
be made available for patients with special needs. Do not use abbreviations or acronyms
because they can be confused and misunderstood. Web-based videos can be helpful for
patients who cannot read. These instructions should be reviewed with the patient in the
surgeon’s office or in the preoperative testing center.




To prevent regurgitation or emesis and aspiration of gastric contents, the patient should
not ingest solid foods before the surgical procedure. These instructions are usually stated
as NPO after midnight. Solid foods empty from the stomach after changing to a liquid
state, which may take up to 12 hours. Clear fluids may be unrestricted until 2 to 3 hours
before the surgical procedure, but only at the discretion of the surgeon or anesthesia
provider in selected patients. NPO time usually is reduced for infants, small children,
patients with diabetes, and older adults prone to dehydration.

The physician may want the patient to take any essential oral medications that he or she
normally takes. These can be taken as prescribed with a minimal fluid intake (a few sips
of water) up to 1 hour before the surgical procedure.
The skin should be cleansed to prepare the surgical site. Many surgeons want patients to
clean the surgical area with an antimicrobial soap preoperatively or have the patient
shower with an antimicrobial sponge, commonly chlorhexidine, the morning of surgery.
Patients should be told not to allow the soap to get in the eyes or ears. Chlorhexidine
preparations can harm the corneas and tympanic membranes. Patients who will undergo a
surgical procedure on the face, ear, or neck are advised to shampoo their hair before
admission, because this may not be permitted again for a few days or weeks after the
procedure. Nail polish and acrylic nails should be removed to permit observation of and
access to the nailbed during the surgical procedure. The patient should be advised to
uncover at least one fingernail if the anesthesia provider will use these monitoring
devices during the procedure. Either the finger or toe can be used when a digit is desired,
but the finger is usually more accessible. Some sensors are adhesive and can be placed on
an earlobe or across the bridge of the nose. The nailbed is a vascular area, and the color
of the nailbed is one indicator of peripheral oxygenation and circulation. The Oxisensor
(optode) of a pulse oximeter may be attached to the nailbed to monitor oxygen saturation
and pulse rate.




A finger cuff may be used for continuous blood pressure monitoring. Nail polish or
acrylic nails inhibit contact between these devices and the vascular bed.

Jewelry and valuables should be left at home to ensure safekeeping. If electrosurgery will
be used, patients should be informed that all metal jewelry, including wedding bands and
religious artifacts, should be removed to prevent possible burns. Loss prevention is a
consideration as well.

Patients should be given other special instructions about what is expected, such as when
to arrive at the surgical facility. A responsible adult should be available to take the patient
home if the procedure, medication, or anesthetic agent renders the patient incapable of
driving. Family members or significant others should know where to wait and where the
patient will be taken after the surgical procedure.
Informed consent. The physician should obtain informed consent from the patient or legal
designee. After explaining the surgical procedure and its risks, benefits, and alternatives,
the surgeon should document the process and have the patient sign the consent form. This
documentation becomes part of the permanent record and accompanies the patient to the
OR. Policy and state laws dictate the parameters for ascertaining an informed consent.




Anesthesia assessment. An anesthesia history and physical assessment are performed
before a general or regional anesthetic is administered. The history may be obtained by
the surgeon, and/or the patient may be asked to complete a questionnaire for the
anesthesia provider in the surgeon’s office or in the preoperative testing center. An
interview by an anesthesia provider may be conducted before admission if the patient has
a complex medical history, is high risk, or has a high degree of anxiety. All patients
should understand the risks of and alternatives to the type of anesthetic to be
administered. After discussion with the anesthesia provider, the patient should sign an
anesthesia consent form.
Patient positions

Positioning for a surgical procedure is important to the patient’s outcome. Proper
positioning facilitates preoperative skin preparation and appropriate draping with sterile
drapes. Positioning requires a detailed knowledge of anatomy and physiologic principles
and familiarity with the necessary equipment. Safety is a prime consideration. Patient
position and skin preparation are determined by the procedure to be performed, with
consideration given to the surgeon’s choice of surgical approach and the technique of
anesthetic administration. Factors such as age, height, weight, cardiopulmonary status,
and preexisting disease condition (e.g., arthritis, allergies) also should be incorporated
into the plan of care. Preoperatively, the patient should be assessed for alterations in skin
integrity, for joint mobility, and for the presence of joint or vascular prostheses. The
expected outcome is that the patient will not be harmed by positioning, prepping, or
draping for the surgical procedure. Efficiency of the patient preparation process can be
attained by organizing activities in a logical sequence. The main objectives for any
surgical or procedural positioning are as follows:

Optimize surgical-site exposure for the surgeon.

Minimize the risk for adverse physiologic effects.

Facilitate physiologic monitoring by the anesthesia provider.

Promote safety and security for the patient.

Responsibility for Patient Positioning

The selection of the surgical position is made by the surgeon in consultation with the
anesthesia provider. Adjustments are made as necessary for the administration and
monitoring of anesthetic and for maintenance of the patient’s physiologic status. The
theatre technologist may be responsible for placing the patient in a surgical position, with
guidance from the anesthesia provider and the surgeon. In essence, patient positioning is
a shared responsibility among all team members. The anesthesia provider has the final
word on positioning when the patient’s physiologic status and monitoring are in question.
In cases of complex positioning or positioning patients who are obese, the plan of care
includes the need for additional help in lifting or positioning. Special devices or
positioning aids may be necessary. The weight tolerance of the mechanism and balance
of the OR bed is critical. Manufacturer recommendations should be consulted for
guidance in selecting the appropriate bed. To avoid questions or confusion, the weight
tolerance should be clearly labeled on every OR bed.
Timing of Patient Positioning and Anesthetic Administration

Moving the patient from the transport cart to the OR bed or vice versa requires that both
surfaces are securely locked and stable. Someone should be stationed on the far side of
the receiving surface to prevent the patient from tumbling off the edge. For any patient
under the influence of an anesthetic agent or narcotic medication, personnel should be at
the head, foot, and both sides of the patient to prevent dependent parts from sliding off
the table. The neck of the patient’s gown should be untied to prevent entanglement and
choking as the patient moves or is moved from one surface to another. After transfer from
the transport cart to the OR bed, the patient is usually supine (face up on the back).
Privacy is maintained with a warm cotton blanket, and the thigh strap is positioned in
clear sight of the entire team. The patient may be anesthetized in a supine position and
then repositioned for the surgical procedure. Some patients are positioned and then
anesthetized if their physiologic status requires special care. If patients undergo a
procedure in a prone position and with general anesthesia, they are anesthetized and
intubated on the transport cart. A minimum of four people is required to place the patient
safely in the prone position on the OR bed. Commonly, more personnel are needed for a
safe transfer between surfaces when the patient is fully under anesthesia and intubated.
Several factors influence the time at which the patient is positioned:

the site of the surgical procedure;

the age and size of the patient;

the technique of anesthetic administration;

whether the patient is conscious and in pain while moving. The patient is not moved,
positioned, or prepped until the anesthesia provider indicates it is safe to do so.

Preparations for Positioning

Before the patient is brought into the OR, theatre technologist should do the following:

Review the proposed position by referring to the procedure book and the surgeon’s
preference in comparison with the scheduled procedure.

Ask the surgeon for assistance if unsure how to position the patient.

Assess for any patient-specific positioning and padding needs.
Check the working parts of the OR bed before bringing the patient into the room.

Assemble and test all table attachments and protective pads anticipated for the surgical
procedure and have them immediately available for use.

Review the plan of care for unique needs of the patient.

Safety Measures

Safety measures, including the following, are observed while transferring, moving, and
positioning patients:

The patient is properly identified before being transferred to the OR bed, and the surgical
site is confirmed according to facility policy. The surgeon is required to initial the correct
site.

The patient is assessed for mobility status, which includes determination of the patient’s
ability to transfer between the transport cart and the OR bed. Do not plan to have patients
move themselves toward an affected limb or toward the blinded eye.

The OR bed and transport vehicle are securely locked in position, with the mattress
stabilized during transfer to and from the OR bed. Untie the ties of the patient’s gown,
and take care not to allow the patient’s gown or blanket to become lodged between the
two surfaces or under the bottom of a moving patient. Velcro strips or other means should
be used to maintain the stability of the mattresses of the two surfaces.

Two people should assist an awake patient with the transfer by positioning themselves on
each side of the patient’s transfer path. The person on the side of the transport cart assists
the patient in moving toward the OR bed. The person on the opposite side prevents the
patient from falling over the edge of the OR bed.

Adequate assistance in lifting unconscious, anesthetized, obese, or weak patients is
necessary to prevent injury. A minimum of four people is recommended, and transfer
devices and lifters may be used. The patient is moved on the count of three, with the
anesthesia provider giving the signal count. Sliding or pulling the patient may cause
dermal abrasion or injury to soft tissues. Dependent limbs can create a counterbalance
and cause the patient to fall to the floor. Examination gloves should be worn if the patient
is incontinent or offers other risk of exposure to blood and body substances.

Anatomic and Physiologic Considerations
A patient’s tolerance of the stresses of the surgical procedure depends greatly on normal
functioning of the vital systems. The patient’s physical condition is considered, and
proper body alignment is important. Criteria are met for physiologic positioning to
prevent injury from pressure, crushing, pinching, obstruction, and stretching. Each body
system is considered when planning the patient’s position for the surgical procedure.

Respiratory Considerations

Unhindered diaphragmatic movement and a patent airway are essential for maintaining
respiratory function, preventing hypoxia, and facilitating induction by inhalation
anesthesia. Chest excursion is a concern because inspiration expands the chest anteriorly.
Some positions limit the amount of mechanical excursion of the chest. Some hypoxia is
always present in a horizontal position because the anteroposterior diameter of the
ribcage and abdomen decreases.The tidal volume, the functional residual capacity of air
moved by a single breath, is reduced by as much as one third when a patient lies down
because the diaphragm shifts cephalad. Therefore there should be no constriction around
the chest or neck. The patient’s arms should be at his or her side, on armboards, or
otherwise supported not crossed on the chest, unless absolutely necessary for the
procedure. Patients have additional respiratory compromise if they are obese, smoke, or
have pulmonary disease.

Circulatory Considerations

Adequate arterial circulation is necessary for maintaining blood pressure, perfusing
tissues with oxygen, facilitating venous return, and preventing thrombus formation.
Occlusion and pressure on the peripheral blood vessels are avoided. Body support and
restraining straps must not be fastened too tightly. Anesthetic agents alter normal body
circulatory mechanisms, such as blood pressure. Some drugs cause constriction or
dilation of the blood

vessels, which is further complicated by positioning.

Peripheral Nerve Considerations

Prolonged pressure on or stretching of the peripheral nerves can result in injuries that
range from sensory and motor loss to paralysis and muscle wasting. The extremities, and
the body, should be well supported at all times. The most common sites of injury in the
upper body are the divisions of the brachial plexus and the ulnar, radial, peroneal, and
facial nerves; the axons may be stretched or disrupted. Extreme positions of the head and
arm greater than 90 degrees can easily injure the brachial plexus and other superficial
nerves. Peripheral nerve injury of the lower body can involve the sciatic, ilioinguinal, and
peroneal nerves. If the patient is improperly positioned, the ulnar, radial, and peroneal
nerves may be compressed against bone, stirrups, upright retractor posts, or the OR bed.

Musculoskeletal Considerations

A strain on muscle groups results in injury or needless postoperative discomfort. A
patient who is anesthetized lacks protective muscle tone. If the head is extended for a
prolonged time, the patient may have more pain from the resulting stiff neck than from
the surgical wound. Care is taken not to hyperextend a joint, which not only causes
postoperative pain but also may contribute to permanent injury to an extremity. Elderly or
debilitated patients with osteoporosis or other bone disease may suffer fractures. When
turning a patient, always keep the spine in alignment by grasping the shoulder girdle and
hip in a logrolling fashion. Do

not turn or elevate a patient by grasping only a hip or shoulder and twisting the spine.
Proper body alignment is maintained.

Soft Tissue Considerations

Body weight is distributed unevenly when the patient lies on the OR bed. Weight that is
concentrated over bony prominences can cause skin pressure ulcers and deep tissue
injury. These areas should be protected from constant external pressure against hard
surfaces, particularly in patients who are thin or underweight. In addition, tissue that is
subjected to prolonged mechanical pressure (e.g., a fold in the skin under an obese or
malnourished patient) is not adequately perfused. Wrinkled sheets and the edges of a
positioning or other device under the patient can cause pressure on the skin. Foam pads
are not adequate to relieve pressure because they compress and do not alternate pressure.
Towels and sheet rolls do not relieve pressure because they are unyielding to the patient’s
body weight. Gel pads

are preferred.

Complications caused by positioning

Hemodynamic instability from orthostatic position

Poor ventilation from thoracic compression

Peripheral nerve injury from compression or stretch
Tissue damage from crush or shearing force

Ischemia of hair-bearing scalp, which causes bald spots

Compartment syndrome

Pressure necrosis

Digit amputation in table bends

Blindness from optic nerve ischemia

Corneal abrasion

Ischemic limbs from arterial occlusion

Venous emboli

Vertebral injury

Panic attacks and feelings of claustrophobia in awake patient




Surgical Positions

Supine (Dorsal) Position

The patient lies flat on the back with the arms secured at the sides with the lift sheet; the

palms extend along the side of the body in their natural resting position. The elbows may
be protected with padded plastic sleds. The legs are straight and parallel and are in line
with the head and spine; the hips are parallel with the spine. A safety belt is placed across
the thighs 2 inches above the knees. Small positioning pads may be placed under the head
and popliteal area to relieve pressure on the spine as needed. The heels are protected from
pressure with a pillow, gel pad, or donut. The feet must not be in prolonged plantar
flexion or nerve stretch injury could result. To prevent footdrop, the soles may be
supported by a pillow or padded footboard. The supine position is used for procedures on
the anterior surface of the body, such as abdominal, abdominothoracic, and some lower
extremity procedures.
Trendelenburg’s Position

With Trendelenburg’s position, patients lie on their back in the supine position with the
knees over the lower break of the OR bed. The knees must bend with the break of the OR

bed to prevent pressure on the peroneal nerves and veins in the legs. The thigh strap is
positioned 2 inches above the knees over the blanket. The entire OR bed is tilted
approximately 30 to 45 degrees downward at the head, depending on the surgeon’s
preference. The foot of the OR bed is lowered to the desired angle to help counterbalance
the patient’s body weight. Trendelenburg’s position is used for procedures in the lower
abdomen or pelvis when shifting the abdominal viscera cephalad away from the pelvic
area for better exposure. Although surgical accessibility is increased, lung volume is
decreased and the heart is mechanically compressed by the pressure of the organs against
the diaphragm. Intracranial and intraocular pressure is increased. Therefore the patient
remains in this position for as short a time as possible. When returning the patient to a
horizontal position, the leg section should be raised first and slowly while venous stasis
in

the legs is reversed. The entire OR bed is then leveled.
Reverse Trendelenburg’s Position

With reverse Trendelenburg’s position, patients lie on their back in the supine position.
The entire OR bed is tilted 30º to 40º so the head is higher than the feet; a padded
footboard is used to prevent the patient from sliding toward the tilt. The thigh safety belt
is positioned 2 inches above the knees over the blanket. Small pillows may be placed
under the knees. A small pillow or donut is used to stabilize the head. This position is
used for thyroidectomy to facilitate breathing and to decrease blood supply to the surgical
site (blood pools caudally). It is also used for laparoscopic gallbladder, biliary tract, and
stomach procedures to allow the abdominal viscera to fall away from the epigastrium,
providing access to the upper abdomen. Venous stasis can cause complications, and
prevention of deep vein thrombosis is an important consideration. The use of sequential
compression devices, antiembolic stockings, or foot pumps is suggested to improve
venous return.

Semi-Fowler’s Position

With semi-Fowler’s position, the patient is supine with the buttocks at the flex in the OR
bed and the knees over the lower break. The foot of the OR bed is lowered slightly,
flexing the knees. The body section is raised 45 degrees and thereby becomes the
backrest. Arms may rest on armboards parallel to the OR bed or on a large soft pillow on
the lap. Care is taken that the arms do not fall dependent from the body during the
procedure. The safety belt is secured 2 inches above the knees over the blanket. The
entire OR bed is tilted slightly with the head end downward to prevent the patient from
slipping toward the foot of the OR bed. Feet should rest on the padded footboard to
prevent footdrop. For cranial procedures, the head is supported in a headrest. In this
position, the OR bed looks like a modified armchair. This position may be used for
shoulder, nasopharyngeal, facial,and breast reconstruction procedures. Complications of
this position include air embolus into the venous system, pelvic pooling or venous stasis,
hypotension, positional orthopedic injury, and tissue pressure injury and necrosis.




Sitting Position

With the sitting position, the patient is placed in the Fowler’s position except that the
torso is completely in an upright position.




Lithotomy Position

The lithotomy position is used for perineal, vaginal, urologic, and rectal procedures. The
patient’s buttocks rest along the break between the body and the leg sections of the OR
bed. A padded metal footboard is used as an OR bed extension so the patient’s legs do
not extend over the foot of the OR bed before the legs are placed in the upright position.

Stirrups are secured in sockets on each side of the OR bed rail at the level of the patient’s
upper thighs. They are adjusted at equal height on both sides and at an appropriate height
for the length of the patient’s legs to maintain symmetry when the patient is positioned.
After the patient is anesthetized, the safety belt is removed and the patient’s legs are
raised simultaneously by two people. The safety belt should not remain in place over the
abdomen with the patient in the lithotomy position. It causes increased abdominal venous
pressure, which in turn increases the risk for blood loss. Each person grasps the sole of a
foot in one hand and supports the calf at the knee area with the other. The knees are
flexed, and the legs and feet are placed inside the stirrups. Avoid overflexing the hip
toward the abdomen to prevent ilioinguinal nerve compression. For sling or candy cane
stirrups, the feet are placed in the fabric slings of the stirrups at a 90-degree angle to the
abdomen. One padded loop encircles the sole; the other padded loop goes around the
ankle.
Prone Position

Prone position is used for all procedures with a dorsal or posterior approach. When the
prone position is used, the patient is anesthetized and intubated in the supine position on

the locked transport cart. The patient’s arms are along his or her sides. When the
anesthesia provider gives permission, the patient is slowly and cautiously shifted toward
the OR bed in the supine position and then turned onto the abdomen onto the OR bed.
The patient’s body is rotated as if rolling a log; a team of at least four to six people is
needed to maintain body alignment during this transfer. The anesthesia provider calls the
count. The anesthesia provider controls the patient’s head and airway while the rest of the
patient’s body is moved by the team. Chest rolls or bolsters under the axillae and along
the sides of the chest from the clavicles to the iliac crests raise the weight of the body
from the abdomen and thorax. The weight of the abdomen falls away from the diaphragm
and keeps pressure off the vena cava and abdominal aorta. This facilitates respiration,

although vital capacity and cardiac index are reduced. To ensure cardiac filling and to
reduce hypotension, venous return from the femoral veins and inferior vena cava is
uninterrupted.
Female breasts should be moved laterally to reduce pressure on them. Male genitalia
should be free from pressure. Pendulous skinfolds should not be crimped under the
patient in any manner.

The arms may lie supported along the sides of the body, with the palms up or inward
toward the body. An alternate position is to place the arms into a diver’s pose by
lowering them toward

the floor and rotating (circumducting) them upward in a natural range of motion. Care is
taken not to dislocate the shoulders. The armboards are reversed on the table, pointing
toward the anesthesia provider. The elbows are padded and are slightly flexed no greater
than 90º to prevent overextension, and the palms are down. The arms may extend beyond
the head, but not so far as to cause brachial plexus compression or stretch. The head can
be turned to one side or positioned face down on a padded headrest to prevent pressure on
the ear, eye, and face.

Clearance of the airway must be ensured. A serious complication of the prone position is
blindness caused by ischemia of the vascular system of the eye. A pillow or padding
under the anterior aspect of the ankles and the dorsa of the feet prevents pressure on the
toes and elevates the feet to aid venous return. Do not permit the patient’s toes to extend
beyond the foot of the bed. Donuts under the knees prevent pressure on the patellae. The
safety belt is placed over the calves to prevent flexion of the lower legs. Care is taken not
to compress the lower legs. An additional belt can be positioned over the posterior thighs
as an added precaution.
Kraske (Jackknife) Position

With the Kraske position, the patient remains supine until anesthetized and is then turned
onto the abdomen (prone position) via rotation. The hips are positioned over the center
break of the OR

bed between the body and leg sections. Chest rolls or bolsters are placed to raise the chest
if the patient is under general anesthesia. A Kraske pillow can be placed at the level of
the anterior thighs to elevate the buttocks. The arms are extended on reverse angled
armboards with the elbows flexed and the palms down. The head is to the side and is
supported on a donut or pillow. The dorsa of the feet and toes rest on a pillow. The safety
belt is placed below the knees. The leg section of the OR bed is lowered the desired
amount (usually about 90º), and the entire OR bed is tilted head downward to elevate the
hips above the rest of the body. The patient is well balanced on the OR bed . For
procedures in the rectal area (e.g., pilonidal sinus, hemorrhoidectomy), the buttocks are
retracted with wide tape strips. Because of the dependent position, venous pooling occurs
cephalad (toward the head) and caudad (toward the feet). It is important to slowly return
the patient to horizontal from this unnatural position to minimize circulatory
complications.




Knee-Chest Position

For this position the patient kneels on the lower section; the knees are thus flexed at a
right angle to the body. The upper portion of the OR bed may be raised slightly to support
the head, which is turned to the side. The arms are placed around the head with the
elbows flexed, and a large soft pillow is placed beneath them. The chest rests on the OR
bed, and the safety belt is placed above the knees. The entire OR bed is tilted head
downward so the hips and pelvis are at the highest point a modified jackknife position.




Lateral Positions

For lateral positioning, the OR bed remains flat. The patient is anesthetized and intubated
in the supine position on the OR bed and then turned to the unaffected side. In the right
lateral position,

the patient lies on the right side with the left side up (for a left-sided procedure); the left
lateral position exposes the right side. The patient is turned by no fewer than four people
to maintain body alignment and achieve stability. The patient’s back is drawn to the edge
of the OR bed. The knee of the lower leg is flexed slightly to provide stabilization, and
the upper leg is flexed to provide counterbalance. The flexed knees may require padding
to prevent pressure and shearing force. In addition, a large soft pillow is placed
lengthwise between the legs to take pressure off the upper hip and lower leg and therefore
prevents circulatory complications and pressure on the peroneal nerve. The ankle and
foot of the upper leg should be supported to prevent footdrop. Bony prominences are
padded. For added stability, a safety belt or a 3-inch-wide tape is placed over the hip. The
patient’s arms may be placed on a padded double armboard, with the lower arm palm up
and the upper arm slightly flexed with the palm down. Blood pressure should be
measured from the lower arm. As an alternative, the upper arm can be positioned on a
padded Mayo stand. A water bag or pressure reduction pad under the axilla protects
neurovascular structures. The shoulders should be in alignment. The patient’s head is in
cervical alignment with the spine. The head should be supported on a small pillow
between the shoulder and neck to prevent stretching the neck and brachial plexus and to
maintain a patent airway.




Kidney position

The flank region is positioned over the kidney elevator on the OR bed when the patient is
turned onto the unaffected side. The short kidney rest is attached to the body elevator at
the patient’s back. The longer rest is placed in front at a level beneath the iliac crest to
minimize pressure on the abdominal organs. Both rests are well padded. In an obese
patient, folds of abdominal tissue may extend over the end of the anterior rest and be
bruised if caution is not taken. The OR bed is flexed slightly at the level of the iliac crest
so the body elevator can be raised as desired to increase space between the lower ribs and
iliac crest. A body strap or wide adhesive tape is placed over the hip to stabilize the
patient after the OR bed is flexed and the elevator is raised. The entire OR bed is tilted
slightly downward toward the head until the surgical area is horizontal; the upper
shoulder and hip should be in a straight line. The upper arm is supported in a double
airplane-style armboard. A gel pad is used to support the chest and protect the breasts. An
axillary roll is placed to take body weight off the deltoid muscle in the shoulder. Before
closure, the OR bed is straightened to allow better approximation of tissues. The term
kidney position is used to designate the lateral flexion used to elevate the surgical site.
Documentation should clearly state either right or left to indicate which kidney is
elevated for the procedure. The kidney position is used for procedures on the kidney and
ureter; this position is not well tolerated. Skin and underlying tissue can be damaged by
excessive pressure during flexion of the OR bed. OR bed flexion combined with use of
the kidney elevator may cause cardiovascular responses. Blood tends to pool in the lower
arm and leg. Circulation is further compromised by increased pressure on the abdominal
vessels when the kidney elevator is raised. The spine is stressed in a lateral flexed
position and

can cause strain on the vertebral structures.




Prepping and draping the patient

Urinary Catheterization

The patient should void to empty the urinary bladder just before transfer to the OR suite
unless the procedure requires the bladderto be full, such as for special bladder tone
testing procedures. If the patient’s bladder is not empty or the surgeon wishes to prevent
bladder distention during a long procedure or after the surgical procedure, urinary
catheterization may be necessary after the patient is anesthetized. An indwelling Foley
catheter may be inserted by a member of the team. This retention catheter maintains
bladder decompression to avoid trauma during a lower abdominal or pelvic procedure, to
permit accurate measurement of output during or after the surgical procedure, and to
facilitate outputand healing after a surgical procedure on genitourinary tract structures.
Catheterization is performed after anesthesia is administered and before the patient is
positioned for the surgical procedure, except for a patient who will remain in the
lithotomy position.The Foley catheter should be inserted before the vaginal or abdominal
skin preparation to prevent perineal splash to the surgical site. The vagina can be prepped
immediately after the Foley catheter is placed. Gloves should be changed and a new prep
set used for the abdominal skin prep.

Principles of Patient Skin Preparation

The purpose of skin preparation is to render the surgical site as free as possible from
transient and resident microorganisms, dirt, and skin oil so that the incision can be made
through the skin with

minimal danger of infection from this source. Many surgeons prefer to have patients
bathe with antimicrobial soap the morning of the surgical procedure.The patient should
be advised to avoid the use of body emollients, oils, creams, and lotions after washing.
Some products decrease the efficacy of antimicrobial soap, and other products prevent
adherence of the return electrode and electrocardiographic (ECG) electrodes to the skin.

The perioperative theatre technologist should assess the patient’s skin before, during, and
after the prepping process. Documentation of the condition of the patient’s skin with
notation of lesions or other pertinent markings is important. Abnormal skin irritation,
infection, or abrasion on or near the surgical site might be a contraindication to the
surgical procedure and is reported to the surgeon. Some patients may have body piercing
jewelry that is located on the face, tongue, nose, lip, eyebrow, ears, or other easily
identified places. In some cases, the piercing jewelry is located under clothing on the
nipples, umbilicus, or genitalia. Body piercing jewelry should be removed for safety
reasons before surgery.

Skin Preparation for Specific Anatomic Areas

Head and Neck

Eye

1. The eyebrows are never shaved or removed unless the surgeon deems this essential.
Eyebrows do not grow back completely or evenly.

2. The eyelashes may be trimmed, if ordered by the surgeon, with fine iris scissors coated
with sterile water-soluble lubricant to catch the lashes.
3. The eyelids and periorbital areas are cleansed with a nonirritating antiseptic agent and
then rinsed with warm sterile water. The prep starts centrally and extends to the periphery
(i.e., from the center of the lid to the brow and cheek).

4. The conjunctival sac is flushed with a nontoxic agent, such as sterile normal saline
solution,with a bulb syringe. Some surgeons use a dilute iodophor solution (not the
detergent or alcohol form). The patient’s head is turned slightly to the affected side. The
solution is contained with sponges or an absorbent towel. Care must be taken to prevent
prep solution from entering the patient’s ears.

Ears, Face, and Nose

1. Skin surfaces should be cleansed at least to the hairline.

2. Cotton applicators are used for cleansing the nostrils and external ear canals.

3. Protect the eyes with a piece of sterile plastic sheeting. If the patient is awake, ask that
the eyes be kept closed during the prep. Cotton balls or nonradiopaque gauze should be
placed in

the ears to prevent runoff. Cotton balls may leave small fibers in residual cerumen in the
ear that can cause irritation.

Neck

1. One sterile towel is folded under the edge of the blanket and gown, which are turned
down almost to the nipple line.

2. The area includes the neck laterally to the table line and up to the mandible, tops of the
shoulders, and chest almost to the nipple line.

3. For combined head and neck surgical procedures, include the face to the eyes; the
shaved areas of the head, ears, and posterior neck; and the area over the shoulders.

Chest and Trunk

Lateral Thoracoabdominal Area

1. The gown is removed. The blanket is turned down well below the lower limit of the
area to be prepared. A towel is folded under the edge of the blanket.
2. The arm is held up during the prep.

3. Beginning at the site of incision, the area may include the axilla, chest, and abdomen
from the neck to the iliac crest. For a surgical procedure in the region of the kidney, it
extends up to the axilla and down to the pubis. The area also extends beyond midlines,
anteriorly and posteriorly, and may include the arm to the elbow .

Chest and Breast

1. The anesthesia provider turns the patient’s face toward the unaffected side.

2. One towel is folded under the blanket edge, just above the pubis. Another is placed on
the OR bed under the shoulder and side.

3. The arm on the affected side is held up by grasping the hand and raising the shoulder
and axilla slightly from the OR bed.

4. The area includes the shoulder, upper arm down to the elbow, axilla, and chest wall to
the table line and beyond the sternum to the opposite shoulder . Breast procedures
generally require both breasts to be prepped.

Shoulder

1. The anesthesia provider turns the patient’s face toward the opposite side.

2. A towel is placed under the shoulder and axilla.

3. The arm is held up by grasping the hand and elevating the shoulder slightly from the
OR bed.

4. The area includes the circumference of the upper arm to below the elbow, from the
base of the neck over the shoulder, scapula,and chest to the midline.

Rectoperineal Area

1. With the patient in the lithotomy position, a moisture-proof pad is placed under the
buttocks and extends to the kick bucket that receives solutions and discarded prep
sponges.

2. The area includes the pubis, external genitalia, perineum and anus, and inner aspects of
the thighs Begin the scrub over the pubic area, scrubbing downward over
the genitalia and perineum. Discard the sponge.

4. The inner aspects of the upper third of both thighs are scrubbed with separate sponges,
working from groin to distal aspect of thigh.

5. The anus is prepped last.

6. The rectoperineal area is prepped before the abdomen, using a separate prep set and
gloves if an abdominal approach is planned.

Vagina

1. Sponge forceps should be included on the preparation table for a vaginal prep because
a portion of the prep is done internally. A disposable vaginal prep tray, with sponge sticks
included, is

available.

2. With the patient in the lithotomy position, a moisture-proof pad is placed under the
buttocks and extends to the kick bucket that receives solutions and discarded prep
sponges.

3. A towel is folded above the pubis.

4. Urinary catheterization is performed if indicated. Vaginal and anal flora should not be
permitted to enter the sterile environment of the urinary bladder.

5. The external area includes the pubis, vulva, labia, perineum, anus, and adjacent area,
including inner aspects of the upper third of the thighs .

6. Begin over the pubic area, scrubbing downward over the vulva and perineum. The
inner aspects of the thighs are scrubbed with separate sponges from the labia majora
outward.

7. The vagina and cervix are cleansed with sponges on sponge forceps or disposable
sponge sticks. The cleansing agent should be applied generously in the vagina because
vaginal mucosa has many folds and crevices that are not easily cleansed.

8. After thorough cleansing of the vagina, wipe it out with a dry sponge to prevent the
possibility of the fluid entering the peritoneal cavity during the surgical procedure on
pelvic organs.
9. The anus is prepped last to prevent intestinal florae from entering the vaginal vault.

Extremities.

1. A moisture-proof pad should be placed on the OR bed under an extremity to retain
runoff solution. This is removed after the prep so that the bed is dry under the surgical
site. The extremity is supported by personnel wearing sterile gloves and remains elevated
until sterile drapes are applied under and around the prepped area.

2. A full circumferential extremity prep may be done in two stages to provide adequate
support to joints and to ensure that all areas are scrubbed. It may include the foot for hip,
thigh,

knee, and lower leg procedures.

3. Caution must be taken to prevent solution from pooling under a tourniquet. The
padding absorbs the solution and could cause tissue maceration. If a nonsterile pneumatic
tourniquet is used, it is positioned before the prep and protected with a sterile clear plastic
drape. A towel tucked around the tourniquet cuff absorbs excess solution. This is
removed before the tourniquet is inflated.

Upper Arm

1. A towel is placed under the shoulder and axilla.

2. The arm is held up by grasping the hand and elevating the shoulder slightly from the
OR bed.

3. The area includes the entire circumference of the arm to the wrist, the axilla, and over
the shoulder and scapula.

Elbow and Forearm

A towel is placed under the shoulder and axilla.

2. The arm is held up by grasping the hand.

3. The area includes the entire arm from the shoulder and axilla to and including the
hand.

Hand
1. Towels may be omitted. The anatomy of the hand furnishes sufficient landmarks to
define the area, and towels are apt to slip over the scrubbed area.

2. The arm must be held up by a gloved person supporting it above

the elbow so that the entire circumference can be scrubbed.

3. The area includes the hand and arm to 3 inches (7.5 cm) above

the elbow.

Hip

1. One towel is placed under the thigh on the OR bed. Another towel is placed on the
abdomen and folded under the edge of the gown, just above the umbilicus.

2. The leg on the affected side is held up by supporting it just below the knee.

3. The area includes the abdomen on the affected side, the thigh to the knee, and the
buttocks to the table line, the groin, and the pubis .

Thigh

1. One towel is placed under the thigh on the OR bed. Another towel is placed on the
abdomen and folded under the edge of the gown, just below the umbilicus.

2. The leg is held up by supporting the foot and ankle.

3. The area includes the entire circumference of the thigh and leg to the ankle, over the
hip and buttocks to the table line, the groin, and the pubis. Take care not to allow the
solution to

pool under the patient’s buttocks.

Knee and Lower Leg

1. A towel is placed over the groin.

2. The leg is held up by supporting it at the foot.

3. The area includes the entire circumference of the leg and extends from the foot to the
upper part of the thigh.
Ankle and Foot

1. Towels are omitted.

2. The foot is held up by supporting the leg at the knee. A legholder device is useful.

Documentation

Details of the preoperative skin condition and preparation should be documented in the
patient’s intraoperative record. These should include, but are not limited to, the
following:

The condition of the skin around the surgical site and placement sites of the return
electrodes

Hair removal, if done, including the method and location, and areas for attachment of
monitors or electrodes

Antiseptic solutions, fat solvents, irrigating solutions, and any other agents used

The skin area prepped and skin reaction, if any

The name of the person who did the prep

Draping

Draping is the procedure of covering the patient and surrounding areas with a sterile
barrier to create and maintain an adequate sterile field. An effective barrier eliminates or
minimizes passage

of microorganisms between nonsterile and sterile areas. Criteria to be met in establishing
an effective barrier are that the material must be:

Blood and fluid resistant to keep drapes dry and prevent migration of microorganisms.
Material should be impermeable to moist microbial penetration (i.e., resistant to strike-
through) and resistant to tearing, puncture, or abrasion that causes fiber breakdown and
thus permits microbial penetration.

Lint-free to reduce airborne contaminants and shedding into the surgical site. Cellulose
and cotton fibers can cause granulomatous peritonitis or embolize arteries.
Antistatic to eliminate risk of a spark from static electricity.

 Sufficiently porous to eliminate heat buildup so as to maintain an isothermic
environment appropriate for the patient’s body temperature.

Drapable to fit around contours of the patient, furniture, and equipment.

Dull and nonglaring to minimize color distortion from reflected light.

Free of toxic ingredients, such as laundry residues and nonfast dyes.

Draping Materials

Self-Adhering Sheeting. Sterile, waterproof, antistatic, and transparent or translucent
plastic sheeting may be applied to dry skin.

Incise Drape. The entire clear plastic drape has an adhesive backing that is applied to
skin. This may be applied separately, or the sheeting may be incorporated into the drape
sheet. The skin

incision is made through the plastic. Antimicrobial incise drapes have an antimicrobial
agent

impregnated in the adhesive or the polymeric film. A film coated with an iodophor-
containing adhesive, for example, slowly releases active iodine during the surgical
procedure to effectively inhibit proliferation of organisms from the patient’s skin. The
skin may be prepped with alcohol and allowed to dry before the drape is applied. Time is
a factor in microbial accumulation

from resident bacteria. Antimicrobial incise drapes are used to sustain suppression,
particularly for procedures that last more than 3 hours.

Towel Drape. A nonwoven towel drape has a band of adhesive along one edge. Used as a
draping towel, it remains fixed on skin without towel clips. This is advantageous when
clips might

obscure the view of a part exposed to x-rays during the surgical procedure. It also is used
to wall off a contaminated area, such as a stoma, from the clean skin area to prevent
spilling contents and

causing infection or chemical irritation.
Aperture Drape. Adhesive surrounds a fenestration (opening) in the plastic sheeting. This
secures the drape to the skin around the surgical site, such as an eye or ear. Caution is
used in applying

this type of drape around the face of a patient who is awake. The patient must have
breathing space. If oxygen is used during a local procedure, it can build up under the
drape creating a fire hazard

if cautery is used. Some patients experience claustrophobia. Fabric towels may not feel as
confining.

Advantages of Self-Adhering Drape Material

Resident microbial flora from skin pores, sebaceous glands, and hair follicles cannot
migrate laterally to the incision.

Microorganisms do not penetrate the impermeable material.

Landmarks and skin tones are visible through the transparent plastic.

Inert adhesive holds drapes securely, eliminating the need for towel clips and possible
puncture of the patient’s skin.

Plastic sheeting conforms to body contours and has elasticity to stretch without breaking
its adhesion to skin.

Some self-adhering drapes have sufficient moisture-vapor permeability to reduce
excessive moisture buildup that could macerate the skin or loosen adhesive. A nonporous
material should not cover more than 10% of the body surface because it may interfere
with the patient’s thermal regulatory mechanism of perspiration evaporation.

Principles of Draping

The entire team should be familiar with the draping procedure because draping is an
important step in the preparation of the patient for a surgical procedure. The scrub person
should be knowledgeable and ready to assist with draping. The scrub person is
responsible for seeing that necessary articles are arranged in proper sequence on the
instrument table. Once a drape is placed

it cannot be moved without contamination. The person responsible for draping the patient
may vary, as do materials and styles of drapes used to create a sterile field. The surgeon
or assistant usually places the self-adhering incise drape or towels and towel clips to
outline the surgical site. The scrub person assists with placing the remainder of the
drapes.

During any draping procedure, the circulating nurse should stand by to direct the scrub
person as necessary and to watch carefully for breaks in technique. A contaminated drape
or exposure

of a nonsterile area is a potential source of infection for the patient.

Basic principles regarding draping

1. Place drapes on a dry area. The area around or under the patient may become damp
from solutions used for skin preparation. The circulating nurse removes damp items or
covers

the area to provide a dry field on which to lay sterile drapes.

2. Allow sufficient time to permit careful application.

3. Allow sufficient space to observe sterile technique. Do not reach across a nonsterile
surface.

4. Handle drapes as little as possible.

5. Never reach across the OR bed to drape the opposite side; go around it.

6. Take towels and towel clips, if used, to the side of the OR bed from which the surgeon
is going to apply them before handing them up.

7. Carry folded drapes to the OR bed. Watch the front of the sterile gown; it may bulge
and touch the nonsterile OR bed or blanket on the patient. Stand well back from the
nonsterile OR bed.

Hold drapes high enough to avoid touching nonsterile areas, but avoid touching the
overhead operating light.

Hold a drape high until it is directly over the proper area, and then lay it down where it is
to remain. Once a sheet is placed, do not adjust it. Be careful not to slide the sheet out of
place when opening the folds.
Protect gloved hands by cuffing the end of the sheet over them. Do not let gloved hands
touch the skin of the patient or other nearby items, such as the IV.

8. In unfolding a sheet from the prepped area toward the foot or head of the OR bed,
protect the gloved hand by enclosing it in a turned-back cuff of sheet provided for this
purpose. Keep

hands at table level.

9. If a drape becomes contaminated, do not handle it further. Discard it without
contaminating gloves or other items.

If the end of a sheet falls below waist level, do not handle it further. Drop it, and use
another.

If in doubt as to its sterility, consider a drape contaminated.

If a drape is incorrectly placed, discard it. The circulating nurse peels it from the OR bed
without contaminating other drapes or the prepped area.

A piercing towel clip that has been fastened through a drape has its points contaminated.
Remove it only if absolutely necessary, and then discard it from the sterile setup without
touching the points. Cover the area from which it was removed with another piece of
sterile draping material.

Operation Theatre Ethics

The ethics of a profession establish the role and scope of professional behavior and the
nature of relationships with patients and colleagues.

Autonomy: Self-determination implies freedom of choice and ability to make decisions to
determine one’s own course of action. Decisions may be made in collaboration with
others, based on reasonable and prudent information. Decisions should be acknowledged
and respected by others.

Beneficence: Duty to help others seek balance between what is good to do and what
might produce harm to another or self.

Nonmaleficence: Duty to do no harm.
Justice: Allocation of human, material, and technologic resources a person has a right to
receive or claim (i.e., equality of care).

Veracity: Devotion to truthfulness (i.e., to give accurate information).

Fidelity: Quality of faithfulness, based on trust and honesty, which protects rights of
individuals (e.g., dignity, privacy).

Confidentiality: Respect for privileged information received from another person with
disclosure only to appropriate others.

An ethical dilemma arises in the work situation when the choice between two or more
alternatives creates a conflict between an individual’s value system and moral obligation
to the patient, to the family or significant others, to the physician, or to the employer and
coworkers. Conflicts can be between rights, duties, and responsibilities.

Both legal and ethical considerations can cause conflicts. Legally, a patient has the right
to choose among treatment alternatives or the right to refuse treatment. Philosophically,
the patient’s preference may be different from that of the health care provider. The
primary responsibility to the patient is to ensure delivery of safe care. This includes use
of appropriate and available technology, but only if this is the patient’s choice, with
informed consent freely given, or is known to be the patient’s wish. Conversely, the
patient and the caregiver may be forced to face court-ordered procedures or treatments.
This may impose the need to assist in a surgical intervention such as a cesarean section
on a woman who has moral or religious objections to this form of treatment but who has
been ordered by the court to have the procedure performed for the benefit of the unborn
fetus.

Maintaining Operation Theatre records

Clinical records include the admitting diagnosis, the patient’s chief complaint, complete
history and physical examination findings, the results of laboratory examinations, and the
physicians and nurse care plans. Most hospitals are moving toward electronic medical
records accessible to all authorized caregivers via computer and the Internet. Records
should state the therapy used, including surgical procedures, and include progress notes,
consultation remarks, the patient’s condition on discharge, and observations in case of
death. A summary of the hospitalization experience should be complete. These records
are signed in writing or electronically by the physicians and nurses attending the patient.
The anesthesia record completed during the surgical procedure by the anesthesia provider
also becomes part of the patient’s record. The circulator should document pertinent
remarks regarding the care rendered in the OR and the patient’s response on the nurses’
note sheets or the progress notes. Documentation is a responsibility of all professional
team members who implement direct patient care. Notes about the surgical procedure
should be explicit, dictated

promptly after completion of the procedure, and incorporated into the record of each
surgical patient. For the surgeons’ convenience, many hospitals have dictating machines
or a phone

hookup with the medical records department installed within the OR suite, usually
located in the dressing room or lounge. Voice recognition software can be used to dictate
procedural notations in the patient’s electronic records.

Details of the preoperative and postoperative diagnosis and the surgical procedure itself
may have medical and legal significance. Transcription of the surgeon’s dictation and
maintenance of the patient’s chart after discharge from the hospital are responsibilities of
the medical records department. The patient’s printed chart may be put on microfilm or
captured electronically for storage.

Retrieval for review of patient records gives the perioperative theatre technologist the
opportunity to evaluate the patient care given. Personnel records can be maintained.
Other essential records can be stored in and retrieved from computer databases on a
password-controlled basis. The central processing unit for the OR computer system
usually is located in or near the control desk. A fax and/or scanner machine may be
available for the electronic transfer of documents, records, and patient care orders
between the OR and surgeons’ offices. Security systems usually can be monitored from
the control desk. Alarms are incorporated into electrical and piped-in systems to alert
personnel to the location of a system failure. A centralized emergency call system
facilitates summoning help. Some facilities have a panic button to summon the security
department. Narcotics are kept in locked cabinets and can be signed out only by
appropriate personnel.

Access to exchange areas, offices, and storage areas may be limited during evening and
night hours and on weekends. Doors may be locked. Some hospitals use alarm systems,
video surveillance in hallways and ORs, and electronic metal detection devices to control
intruders and to prevent theft or vandalism. Computers and records must be secured to
protect patient confidentiality.
1.2.2.4 Learning Activities

1.2.2.4.1 Field Visit to Operating Theatre

Objectives of the visit: Identify equipment for positioning patient during surgery and their
functions.

1.2.1.5 Self-Assessment

You are provided with the following questions for self -assessment, attempt them and
check your responses

A theatre technologist is preparing a patient for surgery. What are five (5) patient
preparation procedures that the technologist will do?

A patient is about to sign an informed consent. What are four (4) important information
contained in the consent form?

What is the aim of positioning a patient before a surgical procedure?

During transferring of patients in theater, what are five (5) safety measures that need to
be considered?

What are five (5) complications caused by positioning?

Outline characteristics of an effective draping material

What are the ethical principles that need to be adhered to in an operating theater?

What documentation should appear in a patients perioperative records after pre-operative
preparation?

1.2.2.6 Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials

Functional OR

OR bed

Safety belt

Anesthesia screen
Lift sheet

Arm board

Wrist or arm strap

Upper extremity table

Body rest

Stirrups

footboard

1.2.2.7 References

Cowperthwaite, L. Holm, R. (2015) Guideline implementation: Preoperative patient skin
antisepsis, AORN J 101(1):71–80.

Morikane, K. (2015). Use of chlorhexidine to prevent surgical site infections, J
Microbiol Immunol Infect 48(2).

Roebuck, A., Harrison, E. (2014). Operating theatre etiquette, sterile technique and
surgical site preparation, Surgery 32(3):109–116.

 Kennedy, L. (2015 ). Implementing recommended practices for sterile technique, AORN
J 89(1):15–23.

1.2.2.8 Responses

A theatre technologist is preparing a patient for surgery. What are five (5) patient
preparation procedures that the technologist will do?

Taking medical history and physical examination.

Laboratory tests.

Blood type and crossmatch

Diagnostic procedures
Give the patient written preoperative instructions to follow before admission for the
surgical procedure

Ensure the patient does not ingest solid foods before the surgical procedure

The skin should be cleansed to prepare the surgical site.




A patient is about to sign an informed consent. What are four (4) important information
contained in the consent form?

Details explaining about the surgical procedure

Possible risks involved

Benefits of the surgical procedure

Alternatives to the procedure

What is the aim of positioning a patient before a surgical procedure?

Optimize surgical-site exposure for the surgeon.

Minimize the risk for adverse physiologic effects.

Facilitate physiologic monitoring by the anesthesia provider.

Promote safety and security for the patient.

During transferring of patients in theater, what are five (5) safety measures that need to
be considered?

The patient is properly identified before being transferred to the OR bed.

The patient is assessed for mobility status, which includes determination of the patient’s
ability to transfer between the transport cart and the OR bed.

The OR bed and transport vehicle are securely locked in position, with the mattress
stabilized during transfer to and from the OR bed.
Two people should assist an awake patient with the transfer by positioning themselves on
each side of the patient’s transfer path.

Adequate assistance in lifting unconscious, anesthetized, obese, or weak patients is
necessary to prevent injury.

What are five (5) complications caused by positioning?

Hemodynamic instability from orthostatic position

Poor ventilation from thoracic compression

Peripheral nerve injury from compression or stretch

Tissue damage from crush or shearing force

Ischemia of hair-bearing scalp, which causes bald spots

Compartment syndrome

Pressure necrosis

Digit amputation in table bends

Blindness from optic nerve ischemia

Corneal abrasion

Ischemic limbs from arterial occlusion

Venous emboli

Vertebral injury

Panic attacks and feelings of claustrophobia in awake patient

Outline characteristics of an effective draping material

Blood and fluid resistant to keep drapes dry and prevent migration of microorganisms.
Material should be impermeable to moist microbial penetration (i.e., resistant to strike-
through) and resistant to tearing, puncture, or abrasion that causes fiber breakdown and
thus permits microbial penetration.
Lint-free to reduce airborne contaminants and shedding into the surgical site. Antistatic to
eliminate risk of a spark from static electricity.

 Sufficiently porous to eliminate heat buildup so as to maintain an isothermic
environment appropriate for the patient’s body temperature.

Drapable to fit around contours of the patient, furniture, and equipment.

Dull and nonglaring to minimize color distortion from reflected light.

Free of toxic ingredients, such as laundry residues and nonfast dyes.




What are the ethical principles that need to be adhered to in an operating theater?

Autonomy

Beneficence

Nonmaleficence

Justice

Veracity

Fidelity

Confidentiality




What documentation should appear in a patients perioperative records after pre-operative
preparation?

The condition of the skin around the surgical site and placement sites of the return
electrodes

Hair removal, if done, including the method and location, and areas for attachment of
monitors or electrodes

Antiseptic solutions, fat solvents, irrigating solutions, and any other agents used
The skin area prepped and skin reaction, if any

The name of the person who did the prep

Learning Outcome 3 Dispose of theatre waste

Introduction to the learning outcome

This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to dispose of
theatre waste. It includes:

Types of wastes in Operation Theatre

Waste disposal methods

Handling of Operation Theatre waste

Performance Standard

……………xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx……………

Information sheet

Types of wastes in Operation Theatre

Infectious waste (e.g., tissues, materials, or equipment that have been in contact with
blood or other body fluids).

Pathological waste (e.g., tissues, organs, body parts, blood, infected animals from
laboratories, and body fluids).

Sharps (e.g., needles, hypodermic needles, scalpels, and other blades, knives, infusion
sets, saws, and broken glass)

 Pharmaceutical waste (e.g., expired, spilt, and contaminated pharmaceutical products,
discarded bottles or boxes with residues, and drug vials).

Radioactive waste includes solid, liquid, and gaseous materials contaminated with
radionuclide.
Genotoxic/cytotoxic waste may include certain cytotoxic drugs often used in cancer
therapy, vomit, urine or feces from patients treated with cytotoxic drugs, chemicals, and
radioactive material.

Chemical waste consists of discarded solid, liquid, and gaseous chemicals (e.g., from
diagnostic and experimental work and from cleaning, housekeeping, and disinfecting
procedures).

Non-infectious/general waste includes waste generated from kitchens, packaging
material, and from stores.

Waste disposal methods

Method of Disposal of Sharps and Sharps Containers

The main risk that is associated with infection comes from sharps contaminated with
blood. Sharps include all objects and materials that pose a potential risk of injury and
infection because of their puncture or cutting properties (syringes with needles, blades,
wires, broken glass, etc). Place sharps in safety boxes that are resistant to punctures and
leakage and are designed so that items can be dropped in using one hand and no item can
be removed. The safety box should be marked “Danger Contaminated Sharps” and with
the biohazard symbol indicated on the outside of the box. It should be closed when three-
quarters full and then placed in a yellow plastic bag or containers with other hazardous
health care waste for removal from the procedure area for disposal. The method of choice
for destruction of full safety boxes is incineration, preferably in an appropriate double-
chamber incinerator. Under exceptional circumstances, full safety boxes may be
incinerated in small numbers by open burning. The residues of incineration should be
safely buried at a depth greater than 1 meter. Do not, under any circumstances, dispose of
used syringes, needles, or safety boxes in normal garbage or dump them without prior
treatment.

Encapsulation is recommended as an alternative method to safely dispose of sharps when
burning or burying them is not possible. For encapsulation, sharps are collected in
puncture-resistant and leak-proof containers.When the container is three-quarters full, a
material such as cement, plastic foam, or clay is poured into the container until it is
completely filled. After the material has hardened, the container is sealed and buried. It is
permissible to encapsulate chemicals or pharmaceutical waste together with sharps.

Disposal of Liquid Contaminated Waste
Liquid contaminated waste requires special handling, because it could pose an infectious
risk to HCWs who handle it. Waste water from health care facilities might contain
various potentially hazardous components, such as microbiological pathogens, hazardous
chemicals, pharmaceuticals, and radioactive isotopes. Wear PPE, including utility gloves,
protective eyewear, and a plastic apron when handling and transporting liquid waste.
Decontaminate containers by placing them in a 0.5 % chlorine solution for 10 minutes
before washing and rinsing them. Remove utility gloves and wash hands and dry hands or
use antiseptic hand-rub.

Disposal of solid waste

Disposal of contaminated wastes separately from non-contaminated waste, because
contaminated waste needs the following special handling:Wear heavy-duty or utility
gloves when handling and transporting solid wastes. Collect the waste containers on a
regular basis and transport the burnable ones to the incinerator or area for burning.
Remove gloves and wash and dry hands or use an antiseptic hand-rub. Non-contaminated
solid wastes should be managed at the health care-facility level or through the local
authority disposal system.

Disposal of Hazardous Waste

Hazardous waste material refers to chemical and pharmaceutical waste, as well as any
waste that contains heavy metals. Hazardous waste should be incinerated or buried if the
quantity is very small. A large quantity of such materials should be sent back to the
original supplier.


Pathological waste

Pathological waste includes all organs i.e placenta, tissues, blood and bodily fluids. In
operation theatres, all anatomical waste and placentas should be collected separately in a
red-colored bin with a red bin liner.Anatomy waste and placentas should be dropped into
a concrete-lined placenta pit or buried at a depth greater than 1 meter, inside the health
care facility compound in a location totally enclosed and secured from unauthorized
access, and at least 100 meters away from any underground water or well. Anatomical
waste that cannot be transported and disposed of immediately should be stored in the
mortuary.If a patient wants to take home the placenta or body parts for burial first place
them in a plastic bag and then into a rigid container for transport.

Infectious Waste
Place infectious waste in a yellow bin with yellow bin liners marked “Biohazard Medical
Waste.”When a bag is no more than three-quarters full, seal it with appropriate adhesive
tape, remove it, and replace it immediately with a new bag.Incinerate infectious waste in
double-chamber incinerators; dispose of ashes from the incinerator in a protected ash pit.
An incinerator must attain a temperature of between 800°C and 1,200°C.Sanitary landfill
or burial is an alternative solution when underground water is not at risk of
contamination.

Hazardous Pharmaceutical Waste and Cytotoxic Waste
Hazardous pharmaceutical waste and cytotoxic waste refers to expired pharmaceuticals or
pharmaceuticals that are unusable for other reasons (for example, a call-back campaign).
Pharmaceutical waste can be hazardous (cytotoxic). This type of waste should be placed
in specific boxes labeled “Danger Hazardous Pharmaceutical and Cytotoxic Waste!” The
boxes should be returned to the pharmacy department, which should ensure their disposal
at the central level.

Learning Activities

Case study

During routine inspection of the hospital, the Quality control team in your hospital
identifies a gap in how the waste is disposed in theater. The team then organizes a
continuous medical education to theatre staff on waste management and disposal.

Highlight key information the team will discuss pertaining to waste disposal in the OR?

Discuss waste management in health care setting?

What are the principles of waste disposal in theatre?




Self-Assessment

You are provided with the following questions for self -assessment, attempt them and
check your responses

What are examples of contaminated waste in theatre?

Define waste generation
What are four basic principles of waste disposal?

Describe the colour coded bin waste disposal system

An incinerator works best at which temperature?

How is a theatre technologist supposed to handle sharps?

What are five (5) types of waste found in theatre?

Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials

Simulated theatre waste

Waste disposal bins

Simulated OR

1.2.2.7 References

Responses

What are examples of contaminated waste in theatre?

Blood

Body fluids

Secretions

Excretions

Define waste generation

Separating contaminated and non-contaminated wastes at the point of generation.

What are four basic principles of waste disposal?

Use appropriate color-coded separate containers for non-infectious, infectious, and highly
infectious waste.

Fill the waste containers not more than three-quarters full.
Use color-coded bins and bin liners or label the waste containers

Never sort through contaminated wastes. Do not try to separate non-contaminated waste
from contaminated waste, or combustible from non-combustible waste, after they have
been combined

Describe the colour coded bin waste disposal system

Non Infectious Waste: Includes food remains, waste paper and packaging material.
Disposed in a BLACK color coded bin

Infectious Waste: Includes routine clinical waste e.g. gloves, gauzes and bandages.
Disposed in YELLOW color coded bins

Highly Infectious: This includes body tissues/ parts e.g. teeth, placenta. Disposed in RED
color coded bins

An incinerator works best at which temperature?

800°C and 1,200°C

How is a theatre technologist supposed to handle sharps during disposal?

Place sharps in safety boxes that are resistant to punctures and leakage and are designed
so that items can be dropped in using one hand and no item can be removed.

The safety box should be marked “Danger Contaminated Sharps” and with the biohazard
symbol indicated on the outside of the box.

It should be closed when three-quarters full and then placed in a yellow plastic bag or
containers with other hazardous health care waste for removal from the procedure area
for disposal.

Do not handle sharps unnecessarily.

Always put on heavy-duty gloves when handling sharps waste containers.

In particular, discard all disposable syringes and needles immediately after they are used.
The needle should not be recapped or removed from the syringe—the whole combination
should be inserted into the safety box directly after use.
What are five (5) types of waste found in theatre?

Infectious waste (e.g., tissues, materials, or equipment that have been in contact with
blood or other body fluids).

Pathological waste (e.g., tissues, organs, body parts, blood, infected animals from
laboratories, and body fluids).

Sharps (e.g., needles, hypodermic needles, scalpels, and other blades, knives, infusion
sets, saws, and broken glass)

 Pharmaceutical waste (e.g., expired, spilt, and contaminated pharmaceutical products,
discarded bottles or boxes with residues, and drug vials).

Radioactive waste includes solid, liquid, and gaseous materials contaminated with
radionuclide.

Genotoxic/cytotoxic waste may include certain cytotoxic drugs often used in cancer
therapy, vomit, urine or feces from patients treated with cytotoxic drugs, chemicals, and
radioactive material.

Chemical waste consists of discarded solid, liquid, and gaseous chemicals (e.g., from
diagnostic and experimental work and from cleaning, housekeeping, and disinfecting
procedures).

Non-infectious/general waste includes waste generated from kitchens, packaging
material, and from stores.
CHAPTER 13 ADMIN




Why Are Standard Operating Procedures Important?

The important task of writing policies and procedures rarely gets the respect it deserves.
Most people recognize the need for having standard policies, but standard operating
procedures    often     get   viewed    as   a     necessary   evil.     Why   is   that?
 Good procedures and work instructions provide a way to communicate and apply
consistent     standards      and      practices      within      your      organization.
GOOD procedures . . .

save time and mistakes

reduce training costs

ensure consistent results

empower the workforce

get read and used

support quality goals

enable you to delegate work
But, BAD procedures, can be as disastrous as no procedures at all!
Bad procedures . . .

cause errors and frustration

increase training costs

waste time and money

detract from quality goals

don’t get read or used

Supervisory services

Definition

Supervision is a professional and collaborative activity between a supervisor and a
worker in which the supervisor provides guidance and support to the worker to promote
competent and ethical delivery of services and supports through the continuing
development of the worker's application of accepted professional peer work knowledge,
skills, and values.

Benefits of supervision in an organization

Supervision is a tool that can be used to achieve the agency’s mission and objectives

Supervision improves performance and helps to manage resources

The supervisor serves as the mediator and liaison between the agency and the worker

Good supervision can increase morale and improve retention

Functions of a supervisor

Administrative

Administrative supervision tasks focus on the effective implementation of the agency’s
policies and procedures and the management of the peer worker’s work performance.
• Quality of work

• Work load

• Liaison to operations - payroll, human resources

• Using program resources, including time, effectively

• Conformance or fidelity to the program model

• Record keeping

Educative

Educative supervision tasks focus on the professional development of the worker
through training, modeling and structuring learning experiences.

• Provide time and space to reflect on peer practice

• Focus on knowledge, skills and attitudes

• Provide individualized training and support

• Provide venue for supporting the peer worker’s professional development

Supportive

Supportive supervision tasks focus on the person’s morale and job satisfaction.

• Give feedback on work

• Discuss personal reactions to the work

• Validate and provide encouragement

• Promote self- care practices

• Advocate for peer support roles

Supervision formats
Individual supervision

Advantages

• Exclusive attention to the worker

• Often experienced as safer by the worker

• More confidential

Disadvantages

• Dependence can develop

• Exposure to only one perspective in supervision

• Lost opportunity to learn from colleagues

Group supervision

Advantages

• More efficient than individual supervision

• Supervisees share information and may learn from each other

• Can be a powerful way to reduce isolation and may foster group cohesiveness

Disadvantages

• Working in a group can be experienced as unsafe by some workers

• It may difficult to meet the specific needs of individual participants and there is a risk
discussions remain generalized and do not meet anyone’s needs in a satisfactory way

Co-supervision

Co - supervision is the provision of supervision by more than one supervisor • This model
may be used when the organization does not have supervisors who are peer support
workers • Peer workers may benefits from a second supervisor if their primary supervisor
doesn’t have the expertise to help them develop in their peer practice • Often, one
supervisor provides more administrative supervision and the other provides more
education. Ideally, both provide support.

Advantages

• Workers benefit from the guidance of more than one person

• Workers can develop their competencies with a skills peer support worker

Disadvantages

Some agencies don’t have the resources to offer co – supervision

There may be challenges in communication or disagreements between the co-supervisors

Co - supervisors may not share the same expectations

Many organizations offer multiple formats of supervision to address different
professional development needs and different workers get different learning needs
addressed by different formats.

Human resource management :

Human resource management is the process of employing people, training them,
compensating them, developing policies relating to the workplace, and developing
strategies to retain employees

Roles of HRM

Staffing

You need people to perform tasks and get work done in the organization. Even with the
most sophisticated machines, humans are still needed. Because of this, one of the major
tasks in HRM is staffing. Staffing involves the entire hiring process from posting a job
to negotiating a salary package. Within the staffing function, there are four main steps:
Development of a staffing plan. This plan allows HRM to see how many people they
should hire based on revenue expectations.

Development of policies to encourage multiculturalism at work. Multiculturalism in
the workplace is becoming more and more important, as we have many more people
from a variety of backgrounds in the workforce.

Recruitment. This involves finding people to fill the open positions.

Selection. In this stage, people will be interviewed and selected, and a proper
compensation package will be negotiated. This step is followed by training, retention,
and motivation.

Development of Workplace Policies

Every organization has policies to ensure fairness and continuity within the organization.
One of the jobs of HRM is to develop the verbiage surrounding these policies. In the
development of policies, HRM, management, and executives are involved in the process.
For example, the HRM professional will likely recognize the need for a policy or a
change of policy, seek opinions on the policy, write the policy, and then communicate
that policy to employees. It is key to note here that HR departments do not and cannot
work alone. Everything they do needs to involve all other departments in the
organization. Some examples of workplace policies might be the following:

Discipline process policy

Vacation time policy

Dress code

Ethics policy

Internet usage policy

Compensation and Benefits Administration

HRM professionals need to determine that compensation is fair, meets industry
standards, and is high enough to entice people to work for the organization.
Compensation includes anything the employee receives for his or her work. In addition,
HRM professionals need to make sure the pay is comparable to what other people
performing similar jobs are being paid. This involves setting up pay systems that take
into consideration the number of years with the organization, years of experience,
education, and similar aspects. Examples of employee compensation include the
following:

Pay

Health benefits

retirement plans or packages

Stock purchase plans

Vacation time

Sick leave

Bonuses

Tuition reimbursement

Retention

Retention involves keeping and motivating employees to stay with the organization.
Compensation is a major factor in employee retention, but there are other factors as well.
Ninety percent of employees leave a company for the following reasons:

Issues around the job they are performing

Challenges with their manager

Poor fit with organizational culture

Poor workplace environment
Despite this, 90 percent of managers think employees leave as a result of pay (Rivenbark,
2010). As a result, managers often try to change their compensation packages to keep
people from leaving, when compensation isn’t the reason they are leaving at all.

Training and Development

Once we have spent the time to hire new employees, we want to make sure they not only
are trained to do the job but also continue to grow and develop new skills in their job.
This results in higher productivity for the organization. Training is also a key component
in employee motivation. Employees who feel they are developing their skills tend to be
happier in their jobs, which results in increased employee retention. Examples of training
programs might include the following:

Job skills training, such as how to run a particular computer program

Training on communication

Team-building activities

Policy and legal training, such as sexual harassment training and ethics training

Dealing with Laws Affecting Employment

Human resource people must be aware of all the laws that affect the workplace. An HRM
professional might work with some of these laws:

Discrimination laws

Health-care requirements

Compensation requirements such as the minimum wage

Worker safety laws

Labor laws

The legal environment of HRM is always changing, so HRM must always be aware of
changes taking place and then communicate those changes to the entire management
organization. Rather than presenting a chapter focused on HRM laws, we will address
these laws in each relevant chapter.

Worker Protection

Safety is a major consideration in all organizations. Oftentimes new laws are created
with the goal of setting federal or state standards to ensure worker safety. Unions and
union contracts can also impact the requirements for worker safety in a workplace. It is
up to the human resource manager to be aware of worker protection requirements and
ensure the workplace is meeting both federal and union standards. Worker protection
issues might include the following:

Chemical hazards

Heating and ventilation requirements

Use of “no fragrance” zones

Protection of private employee information

Communication

Besides these major roles, good communication skills and excellent management skills
are key to successful human resource management as well as general management.




Figure 2: summary of HRM roles
Awareness of External Factors

In addition to managing internal factors, the HR manager needs to consider the outside
forces at play that may affect the organization. Outside forces, or external factors, are
those things the company has no direct control over; however, they may be things that
could positively or negatively impact human resources. External factors might include
the following:

Globalization and offshoring

Changes to employment law
Health-care costs

Employee expectations

Diversity of the workforce

Changing demographics of the workforce

A more highly educated workforce

Layoffs and downsizing

Technology used, such as HR databases

Increased use of social networking to distribute information to employees

For example, the recent trend in flexible work schedules (allowing employees to set their
own schedules) and telecommuting (allowing employees to work from home or a remote
location for a specified period of time, such as one day per week) are external factors
that have affected HR. HRM has to be aware of these outside issues, so they can develop
policies that meet not only the needs of the company but also the needs of the individuals.
Another example is the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, signed into law in
2010. Compliance with this bill has huge implications for HR. For example, a company
with more than fifty employees must provide health-care coverage or pay a penalty.
Currently, it is estimated that 60 percent of employers offer health-care insurance to their
employees (Cappelli, 2010). Because health-care insurance will be mandatory, cost
concerns as well as using health benefits as a recruitment strategy are big external
challenges. Any manager operating without considering outside forces will likely
alienate employees, resulting in unmotivated, unhappy workers. Not understanding the
external factors can also mean breaking the law, which has a concerning set of
implications as well.
Figure 3; Key external factors
An understanding of key external factors is important to the successful HR professional.
This allows him or her to be able to make strategic decisions based on changes in the
external environment.




Resource utilization




Resource utilization refers to the metric that indicates whether your whole team, or
individual employees, are fully booked. It describes the process of planning a project
and ensuring the available resources in the company are being used to their highest
potential. It helps project managers identify which of their employees are being over
utilized so they can allocate responsibilities to someone else if needed, and can also assist
in identifying the people who are underutilized, so they can assign new projects to them.

Resource Allocation vs. Resource Utilization

While the purpose of both processes may seem similar, there are some key distinctions
to be drawn between the two:

Resource allocation refers to a project manager selecting suitable employees for a
project, and then managing them as they complete the project, reassigning or altering
workloads if necessary.

Resource utilization is the process of strategically measuring how effective resources
are. Allocation organizes a project, but it is utilization that makes it successful.

Benefits of resource utilization

Proper utilization of resources is important for maintaining productivity, because it
prevents staff from underperforming or being overburdened by workloads and burning
out.

Projects can be managed with better visibility, reducing the risk of oversights
Maximum utilization of resources gives you a better ROI (Return on investment)

It ensures that specific resources aren’t being over or under-utilized

It allows property management systems to be agile and reschedule resources as quickly
as possible to avoid problems surfacing or becoming worse

Tips for Implementing Resource Utilization

When a company has a robust resource management platform, project managers have
access to the tools needed to approach and master effective resource utilization. Some
key tips to keep in mind include:

Leverage Visibility – especially for larger companies, several projects may be running
at the same time, and while they exist separately they still affect one another down the
line. Rather than looking at projects as separate entities, formulate a resource utilization
plan that can provide insight into project-specific metrics, as well as an overview of all
resources in the company. This way, you will be able to assess overall work capacity and
resource performance on a bigger picture scale, helping identify any company-wide
areas of improvement.

Beware of Scope Creep – projects are shape shifting by nature, so some will inevitably
demand additional time and resources. It is the responsibility of the project manager to
ensure projects don’t go over allotted time or budget. A resource utilization strategy can
help centralize all active projects, leveraging resources equally amongst them to help
keep things within their optimal scope.

Always Be Prepared – as a project manager, you need to be prepared for any and all
scenarios. During your planning process, visualize and run through various situations
that could arise, and prepare for a change of circumstances as if it were inevitable. This
way, if the budget changes, or a resource is lost, your team will be able to adapt more
quickly.
Service delivery

Service delivery can be defined as any contact with the public administration during
which customers – citizens, residents or enterprises – seek or provide data, handle their
affairs or fulfil their duties. These services should be delivered in an effective,
predictable, reliable and customer-friendly manner.

The four key elements for successful service delivery system are

Service Culture is built on elements of leadership principles, norms, work habits and
vision, mission and values. Culture is the set of overriding principles according to which
management controls, maintains and develops the social process that manifests itself as
delivery of service and gives value to customers. Once a superior service delivery system
and a realistic service concept have been established, there is no other component as
fundamental to the long-term success of a service organization as its culture.

Employee Engagement includes employee attitude activities, purpose driven leadership
and HR processes. Even the best designed processes and systems will only be effective
if carried out by people with higher engagement. Engagement is the moderator between
the design and the execution of the service excellence model.

Service Quality includes strategies, processes and performance management systems.
The strategy and process design is fundamental to the design of the overall service
management model. Helping the client fulfil their mission and supporting them in the
pursuit of their organizational purpose, must be the foundation of any service provider
partnership.

Customer Experience includes elements of customer intelligence, account management
and continuous improvements. Perception is king and constantly evaluating how both
customer and end-user perceive service delivery is important for continuous
collaboration. Successful service delivery works on the basis that the customer is a part
of the creation and delivery of the service and then designs processes built on that
philosophy – this is called co-creation




Motivation of employees

Definition: Employee motivation is defined as the enthusiasm, energy level,
commitment and the amount of creativity that an employee brings to the organization on
a daily basis.

Employee motivation is all about how engaged an employee feels in tandem to the
organization’s goals and how empowered he/she feels. Motivation is of two types:

Intrinsic motivation

Extrinsic motivation

Motivated employees are an asset to an organization, they are directly proportional to an
organization’s success. Motivation is intangible, difficult to measure and extremely
difficult to control, but very easy to facilitate if done right. It’s all about intention,
intensity, and perseverance

Intrinsic motivation
Intrinsic motivation means that an individual is motivated from within. He/she has the
desire to perform well at the workplace because the results are in accordance with his/her
belief system.

An individual’s deep-rooted beliefs are usually the strongest motivational factors. Such
individuals show common qualities like acceptance, curiosity, honor, and desire to
achieve success.

Extrinsic motivation

Extrinsic motivation means an individual’s motivation is stimulated by external factors-
rewards and recognition. Some people may never be motivated internally and only
external motivation would work with them to get the tasks done.




Ways of motivating employees

Employee motivation surveys: Use an online survey software or platform to conduct
employee motivation surveys. Let them give candid and genuine feedback about their
experience, ideas, and suggestions. This will help you identify areas that need your
attention.

Employee satisfaction surveys: Employee satisfaction depends on a ton of factors such
as work environment, infrastructure, roles and responsibilities, etc. Conducting
employee satisfaction surveys will help Managers understand dissatisfaction factors and
act on them. Frequent surveys will help addressing dissatisfaction issues faster.

Job well done- recognize it! Recognition plays a huge role in increasing the motivation
levels of the employees. It helps create a healthy bond between the employer and
employees. It not only fulfills our basic need of esteem but also facilitates belonging.

Focus on intrinsic rewards: It is true some people need rewards to get tasks done, but
extrinsic rewards fade very quickly. Focus on motivating your employees from within.
Some may even say, “yeah this is all good but we got to eat and pay rent”… well, that’s
true, for that you compensate your employees well, but make sure you create values for
your organization that are long-lasting.

Autonomy not bureaucracy: Micromanagement is the worst thing you can do as a
manager. It is not only time consuming, but also really unwanted. If you have hired
people with certain skillset let them do their job, be a facilitator, not a dictator. Human
beings value autonomy, give them the freedom to get things done in ways acceptable
and see the changes.

Create an amazing work environment: According to a study conducted by Ohio State
University, your work environment seriously impacts your mood. So it does make sense
to invest in the work environment where people actually spend 60 hours a week. Creating
a good atmosphere will motivate your staff. Just go ahead and do it.

Be a visionary: Lead with vision. Employees need to know their efforts are driving
something important. They need to know their destination and more importantly the path
that will take them there. If as a leader you lack the vision for your own organization,
how do you expect them to own up to your vision? Make a visual reminder of your
organization’s road map, encourage your employees to add to that. You will be surprised
how innovative they can get.

Solicit ideas and suggestions, act on them: Now that you have conducted surveys, you
have received feedback from your employees. Ensure that the ideas, suggestions,
grievances that they have put forth will looked into and addressed in a timely fashion.

Career-pathing: Having a career growth plan with clearly mentioned roles and
responsibilities is crucial to employees. It helps them focus, and direct their efforts to an
achievable goal. Make sure that you sit down with every employee and come up with a
career plan that is transparent and communicated clearly.

Provide flexibility: Not all employees are alike. Some prefer coming to work daily,
others not much. For some, commuting to work might be long and challenging. Allow
some flexibility within reason and your employees will be happy and motivated

Importance of employee motivation
According to psychologists, self-realization is a very human thing. It is our basic nature
to nurture something and see it flourish, it is applicable to most things we do in our day-
to-day life. This is true for both social and societal spaces.

Motivation plays a very important factor in a human’s life. Whether it is about improving
ourselves or our organization’s performance. Motivated employees don’t need to be told
how to get things done, they take initiatives, are eager to take up additional
responsibilities,           are            innovative            and           go-getters.
Motivated employees ensure:

There is a positive atmosphere within the organization

Co-workers are happy and feel safe at work

Make sure clients are happy

They always achieve better results than their counterparts

Motivation, therefore, plays a very important factor and ensures employees remain active
and contribute their best towards their organization. Furthermore, a high level of
motivation leads to a lower level of employee turnover

Herzberg’s motivation theory

Herzberg’s motivation theory or two-factor theory says there are two factors to which an
organization can adjust to influence the levels of motivation at the workplace.

The two factors identified by Herzberg are:

1. Motivating factors: The presence of motivating factors encourages employees to work
harder. They are the factors found in the workplace.

2. Hygiene factors: Hygiene factor if not present will discourage employees from doing
their best at work. Hygiene factors are the surrounding factors that facilitate employee’s
behavior.
Here are some of the examples of motivators and hygiene factor
 Motivators                                                      Hygiene Factors
 Recognition                                                    Security
 Growth                                                         Company policies
 Achievements                                                   Salary
 The work itself                                                Work conditions
 Responsibility                                                 Manager/supervisor

There are 4 statistics that are involved here:

1. High hygiene & high motivation

This is an ideal situation any manager or supervisor would want to achieve. Here all the
employees are happily motivated and have very few grievances.

2. High hygiene & low motivation

In this situation, employees have very few grievances but are also not highly motivated.
A very good example of this situation is employees are paid well but the work is not very
interesting. Employees simply collect their pay cheques and leave.

3. Low hygiene and high motivation

This is a tricky one, here employees are highly motivated but also have numerous
grievances. A typical example of a situation like this is when the work is extremely
interesting but the employees are not paid as per the market standard.

4. Low hygiene & low motivation

No points for guessing, it is obviously a pretty bad situation. Here neither the employees
are motivated nor are the hygiene factors are in place.

How to apply Herzberg’s motivation theory in practice

1. First and foremost rectify and change bureaucratic company policies. Make sure your
Human Resources is in line with what other organizations are offering and they know
what the leadership’s expectations are. Keeping both in mind draft policies that is a win-
win with everyone.
2. Ensure your managers are also mentors and not just bosses. Each employee should be
respected and supported.

3. Organizational culture plays a very crucial role here. No cliches here.

4. Make sure the compensation, perks, and bonuses are as per the market standards. If
you don’t compensate your employees well, why would they show interest in taking any
initiatives?

5. To increase job satisfaction make sure the jobs are constructed well and employees
find their jobs meaningful.

6. Delegate your employees’ responsibilities, make them feel valued. Respect their
individuality, listen to their feedback seriously and take action wherever necessary.

3. Implementation of policies at work place

Policy implementation is generally defined as a series of activities undertaken by
government or organizations to achieve the goals and objectives articulated in policy
statements

Policy implementation process

To implement effective policies and procedures at your workplace, follow these steps to
get the best results.

Step 1: Consultation

When developing your policies and procedures, you must consult with all relevant
stakeholders, including health and safety representatives, contractors (particularly those
who work with you regularly), and of course your employees.

Consultation should ensure that every person in your workplace understands the
importance of company policies and procedures and why they need to be implemented
effectively.

It will also ensure that the policies and procedures are realistic and actionable on a daily
basis.
Tip: Consultation helps to achieve more effective policies and procedures, and is a
greater motivation for employees to follow them.

Step 2: Tailor the policy to your business

The policies and procedures you adopt need to be tailored to the needs of your business,
not just lifted straight from a generic manual.

If you use policies and procedures from another source, it is essential that you adapt them
to your company and your workplace operations.

Step 3: Define obligations clearly – be specific!

All policies should be short and succinct.

All procedural steps should be set out in clear and plain English.

This will create an ‘auditable standard’, meaning that you create a standard that can be
used to measure whether your workplace health and safety obligations are being met or
not.

The obligations outlined in an auditable standard should be defined in enough detail that
persons in your workplace understand exactly what is expected of them.

Specifically state what actions should be taken. For example, don’t say “dispose of
chemicals safely“, but state how this should be done at the site, e.g. “chemicals must be
disposed of in the designated approved dangerous goods waste drum“.

Step 4: Make the policy realistic

Make sure your business has the time, resources and personnel to implement the policy.

There is no point in adopting a policy which aspires to the best practice possible if your
business cannot realistically adopt the procedures set out.

This is the development stage of the policy and procedure done. Once you have
completed these steps, you will have the policies and procedures your company needs to
maintain a healthy and safe workplace.
But the next stage is just as important as the development stage, the implementation
stage…

Don’t get too excited that you have developed the policies and procedures because
without implementing them correctly, they won’t be of any use to you.

Step 5: Publicize the policies and procedures

Put your policies and procedures in writing and make them available to your entire
workforce.

If possible, keep all your policies and procedures in a single manual, and make copies
readily available to all employees.

Tip: Safety documents should also be published on the company’s intranet if you have
one.

Step 6: Train all employees in policies and procedures

You have an obligation to provide adequate information, instruction, supervision and
training to your employees.

Ensure that new employees and contractors are trained and familiar with company
policies and procedures, and that existing staff receive appropriate training, e.g. annual
refresher courses.

Policies and procedures should also be reiterated and discussed with staff regularly at
team meetings to ensure that employees remain aware of the importance & advantages
of the policies and procedures.

Tip: It is a good idea to have all employees and contractors sign off after they have read,
understood and agree to comply with your workplace policies. You should also keep
records of training and induction. Make sure that you record attendees and details of
training content in case an employee fails to sign a training record.

Step 7: Be consistent in your policy implementation
Supervision of your workplace to ensure that the policies and procedures are being
properly implemented by all employees is essential.

Follow-up to ensure that any failure to follow the policy or procedure is addressed.

Specify that full compliance with the stated requirements is needed to ensure a safe
workplace.

After this, any deliberate breaches of policies or procedures must be treated seriously,
and dealt with immediately and consistently.

All supervisors and managers must ‘lead by example’ in implementing policies and
procedures.

If managers condone practices which do not fall within the policy, it could be argued
that disciplinary action against an employee who fails to follow the policy is unfair. The
consequence of any deliberate breach should be appropriate to the severity of the breach,
whether it be:

counselling;

disciplinary action (e.g. a warning); or

In serious circumstances, dismissal.

Step 8: Review all policies and procedures regularly

Policies and procedures must be reviewed periodically.

When any changes occur, ensure your policies and procedures remain relevant and
effective. For example, a change may occur when a business purchases a new piece of
machinery, starts using a new chemical or adopts a new production method. Any such
changes mean that relevant procedures should be reviewed.

Tip: The review cycle will depend on the circumstances and document type, but it is a
good idea to review policies at least every 2 years

Implement a document management system that:
triggers reviews;

notes the dates of change; and

Involves interactive revision.

All employees and contractors need to be made aware of the changes to policy and
procedure when they occur.

Step 9: Enforce the workplace policies and procedures

Once your policies and procedures have been implemented, they need to be enforced.
Make sure that you approach this consistently as this is an important factor in being able
to discipline a worker for a breach of policy.

Problems of Policy Implementation

Equality, Equity and Policy: Problems of Policy Implementation

Theoretical framework

Implementation is the process of turning policy into practice. However, it is common to
observe a ‘gap’ between what was planned and what actually occurs as a result of policy
implementation. There are three major theoretical models of policy implementation
(Buse et al, 2005).

Top-down approach: This approach sees policy formation and policy execution as
distinct activities. Policies are set at higher levels in a political process and are then
communicated to subordinate levels which are charged with the technical, managerial,
and administrative tasks of putting policy into practice.       Political scientists have
theorized that the top-down approach requires that certain conditions be in place for
policy implementation to be effective including:

Clear and logically consistent objectives

Adequate causal theory (to how particular actions would lead to desired outcomes)
An implementation process designed to enhance compliance by implementers (using
incentives and sanctions)

Committed, skillful implementing officials

Support from interest groups and legislature

No changes in socio-economic conditions that undermine political support or the causal
theory underlying the policy

Adequate time and sufficient resources available

Good coordination and communication




Problems associated with the top down approach:

It is very unlikely that all pre-conditions would be present at the same time

Only adopts perspective of those in higher levels of government and neglects the role of
other actors

Risks over-estimating the impact of government action (neglects other factors)

Difficult to apply where no single, dominant policy or agency is involved

Policies change as they are being implemented

Bottom-up approach: This approach recognizes that individuals at subordinate levels
are likely to play an active part in implementation and may have some discretion to
reshape objectives of the policy and change the way it is implemented. The bottom-up
approach sees policy implementation is an interactive process involving policy makers,
implementers from various levels of government, and ‘street level bureaucrats’ such as
frontline staff. Policy may change during implementation.
Problems of the bottom-up approach:

Evaluating the effects of a policy becomes difficult

Difficult to separate the influence of individuals and different levels of government on
policy decisions and consequences. (Important for bureaucratic accountability)

Principal-agent theory: In each situation there will be a relationship between principals
(those who define policy) and agents (those who implement policy), which may include
contracts or agreements that enable the principal to specify what is provided and check
that this has been accomplished. The amount of discretion given to the agents and the
complexity of the principal-agent relationship are affected by:

The nature of the policy problem- including scale of change required, size of affected
group, simple vs. complex intervention, ill-defined vs. clear policy, many cause vs.
single cause, degree of political sensitivity, length of time before changes become
apparent.

The context or circumstances surrounding the problem- political and economic climate,
technological change

The organization of the machinery required to implement the policy- number of formal
and informal agencies, amount of skills and resources required.

In practice

Interpretation of policy directives requires the translation of knowledge on interventions
into the particular local context. Factors to take into account when interpreting health
policy include (Jenkin et al 2013):

Local resources, including human resources and infrastructure

Specific characteristics of the population

Baseline incidence of the health problem

The latency period before an effect of the intervention will be observed
Local variations in the likely effectiveness of particular interventions

Gunn (1978 in Hunter 2003) has identified ten common barriers to effective health policy
implementation:

The circumstances external to the implementing agency impose crippling constraints

Lack of adequate time and sufficient resources

The required combination of resources is not available

The policy to be implemented is not based on a valid theory of cause and effect

The relationship between cause and effect is indirect and there are multiple intervening
links

Dependency relationships are multiple

There is a poor understanding of, and disagreement on, objectives

Tasks are not fully specified in correct sequence

There is imperfect communication and coordination
Liaison services

Liaison services include facilitating communications, establishing partnership contract
plans and procedures, managing conflicts, providing immediate resolution for concerns,
and evaluating collaboration parameters

A liaison officer is an employee who builds and maintains mutually beneficial
relationships, facilitates communications and coordinates activities among two or more
people, agencies or organizations. Often a member of the public relations team, liaison
officers are company representatives that streamline operations and handle public
communications, coordination efforts, incident response and conflict resolution. They
act as technical or subject matter experts for the person, agency or organization they
represent.

Roles and responsibilities of a liaison officer

A liaison officer works in fast-paced, high-pressure environments and must be willing
to take initiative to proactively solve conflicts and address issues. Liaison officer duties
include the following:

acting as contact points for all agency or organizational personnel;

keeping lists of the agencies or personnel representing the person, agency or
organization;

facilitating meetings and cooperation among people, agencies and organizations;

identifying problems in communications among these groups;

collaborating and communicating with necessary constituents and the public; and

Conducting post-mortems when an incident is wrapped up.
Requirements for a successful liaison services in an organization

Champions: The liaison person must believe that the program is worthwhile

The ideal liaison person is:

a champion: someone who genuinely believes in the program and advocates for it
energetically

an opinion leader: someone with informal organizational influence

A boundary spanner: someone well-connected in their workplace who can also
communicate effectively with the program providers.

We found that where liaison people held an indifferent or negative view of the program
they unintentionally undermined it, while those who were enthusiastic amplified others’
enthusiasm. So genuine support for the program is more important than influence or
connections.

2. Credibility: The liaison person should be an authentic advocate for the program

Colleagues judged the suitability and effectiveness of their liaison person in terms of
how well they modelled and espoused research-informed policymaking. This suggests
that for a liaison person to be a credible champion they must be perceived as someone
who believes in what they are saying and knows what they are talking about.

3. Connections: The liaison person should have sound cross-organizational knowledge
and networks

The program was more creatively tailored and integrated, and better attuned to each
organization’s professional development expectations, when their liaison person
consulted with colleagues and advised the program providers. Liaison people’s ability
to act as intermediaries required them to have (or be able to rapidly acquire) knowledge
about multiple aspects of their organization. Broad connections across the organization
ensured that their championing efforts were not restricted to local contexts, but it was
their nuanced understanding of diverse organizational needs and perspectives that
enabled them to represent and respond to their colleagues so effectively.
4. Social skills: The liaison person should have good interpersonal and communication
skills

The quality of connections was as important as the quantity for supporting organizational
understanding and engagement. Our most effective liaison people were persuasive,
approachable and well-liked: people are more inclined to do things for people they like.
Adaptability and project management skills were also vital.

5. Support: Organizational leaders need to visibly back the liaison person as well as the
program

Strong, visible support from managers assured liaison people that their efforts – even
when they verged on ‘nagging’ – were seen as reasonable and warranted. Colleagues
confirmed that evident support from above increased the liaison person’s authority and
demonstrated they were acting on behalf of management.

6. Incentives: If possible, the liaison person role should be incentivized within the
organization

Liaison people were more enthusiastic about the implementation when they benefited
professionally from the role. This included building tasks into performance indicators
and increased organizational status or exposure. But incentives should not pressure
liaison people to coerce participation.

7. Clear expectations: Organizations need clear upfront guidance about the liaison
person role

The liaison people in our study had strikingly different perceptions of their role (eg. as
event organizers, project managers, collaborators, connectors, translators and
integrators). Liaison people and their managers needed to see the role as skilled
facilitation rather than merely administration, and to understand its key attributes,
responsibilities, support needs and likely time commitments. The program providers
must describe these clearly and realistically.

8. Flexibility: The liaison role can be interpreted by each organization
Providing it does not compromise implementation fidelity, it may help to take a flexible
approach to the liaison role, so that core objectives and tasks are specified but the
strategies for achieving them are developed locally. For example, organizations might
prefer to divide the role between two members of staff: one taking responsibility for
administration and another for creative and strategic decisions.

9. Collaboration: The program providers should work with the liaison person in
planning and problem-solving

Where liaison people shared insider knowledge, harnessed local communication
channels and made suggestions for increasing the benefits of the program, activities were
assessed by the program providers and participants as more attractive and useful. This
suggests that working with liaison people as program development partners, rather than
as conduits, could increase our ability to develop fit-for-purpose programs that respond
sensitively to local conditions.

Monitoring and evaluation of services

Monitoring is a continuing function that uses systematic collection of data on specific
indicators to provide the management and the main stakeholders of an ongoing
intervention with indications of the extent of achievement of objectives and progress in
the use of allocated funds.

Indicators

An indicator is a quantitative or qualitative variable that allows changes produced by an
intervention relative to what was planned to be measured. It provides a reasonably simple
and reliable basis for assessing achievement, change or performance. An indicator is
preferably numerical and can be measured over time to show changes. Indicators, which
are determined during the planning phase of a project, usually have the following
components:

What is to be measured? (What is going to change? E.g., higher number of patients
operated on a certain condition)

Unit of measurement to be used (to describe the change, e.g., percentage)
Pre-programme status (sometimes called the “baseline”, e.g., 40 per cent in 2007)

Size, magnitude or dimension of intended change (e.g., 75 per cent in 2008)

Quality or standard of the change to be achieved (e.g., improvement such that patients
hospital stay was lowered)

Target populations(s) (e.g., girls vulnerable to teenage pregnancies from villages)

Time frame (e.g., January 2008 to January 2009)




Evaluation

Evaluation is the systematic and objective assessment of ongoing and/or completed
projects, programmes or policies, in respect of their:

Design

Implementation

Results

The criteria applied in the evaluation are:
Objectives

Efficiency

Effectiveness

Impact

Sustainability

Evaluation emphasizes the assessment of outcomes and impact rather than the delivery
of outputs.

Differences between monitoring and evaluation

Table 1
                              Monitoring                   Evaluation
    Timing                    Monitoring      is     a     Evaluation assesses the
                              continuing function that     entire project cycle.
                              takes place throughout
                              the implementation of a
                              project/programme.
    Depth and purpose         Monitoring is a regular      Evaluation reviews the
                              part of project or           achievements of the
                              programme                    project/ programme and
                              management. It focuses       considers whether the
                              on the implementation of     plan was the best one to
                              the project, comparing       achieve the outcomes
                              what is delivered with
                              what was planned             Evaluation     measures
                                                           achievements, as well
                                                           as positive/ negative
                                                           and            intended/
                                                           unintended        effects.
                                                           Evaluation looks for
                                                           lessons to be learned
                                                           from both success and
                                                           lack of success, and also
                                                           looks for best practices
                                                           which can be applied
                                                           elsewhere.
    Who conducts it            Monitoring is usually       Evaluation   is    best
                               done by people directly     conducted    by      an
                               involved             in     independent    outsider
                               implementing        the     who can be impartial in
                               project/ programme.         consulting      project/
                                                           programme staff.


    Relationship between monitoring and evaluation

    Data collected and insights gained in the course of monitoring between are then
    fed into and used by the evaluation process.




Importance of monitoring and evaluation in an organization

Greater transparency and accountability
One of the greatest benefits of M&E is helping organizations to track, analyses and report
on relevant information and data throughout the life cycle of a project. This allows the
project team to provide robust evidence for all their actions and decisions to
stakeholders, donors and community members from day one. On the other hand,
stakeholders and donors acquire the information and understanding they need to
collaborate, communicate, provide inputs and make informed decisions about strategy
improvements and project operations. Additionally, M&E helps donors to weigh the
efficacy of their funds in a project, which influences their current and future funding
plans.

Improved project performance

A well planned M&E helps the project team to get a better understanding of the target
population’s needs. This helps to define the scope of the project and design objectives
that are relevant, measurable and achievable. A well-defined M&E plan also clarifies the
process and interventions that will lead to the project’s outputs and deliverable.
Moreover, M&E helps the team to plan an end-to-end indicator management system,
identify effective tools and methodologies to measure, analyses and demonstrate every
intervention and its impact on expected outcomes. This enables organizations to see their
progress and identify gaps as they arise and make timely amendments to achieve the
desired results.

Effective resource allocation

All project operations are interwoven around project budgets. The amount of available
cash dictates the duration and magnitude of interventions, choices of resources, number
of employees etc. M&E is an effective tool for enhancing the efficiency and
effectiveness of finances in project implementation. M&E facilitates with the estimation
of the value, worth and impact of project components; and enables the team to verify
what works and what doesn’t and where more money should be invested or where budget
should be cut. M&E allows the team to make appropriate changes to the financial plan
on a regular basis to avoid unfavorable contingencies.

Promotes learning & data-driven decision making

M&E data provides quantifiable results to help the involved parties to learn from project
successes and challenges and be more adaptive. Involved parties are better prepared to
respond to the ever-evolving project situations, determine what worked and what did not
and why it did not work and how it could be improved and make revisions based on data
evidence, rather than assumptions. The team is able to establish links between the past,
present and future actions to improve project implementation and to identify what could
be replicated and scaled up for sustainability of the current project and for future
endeavors.

Systematic management of organization

M&E also functions as a performance management tool as it facilitates organizations to
gather, disseminate and utilize information and data to improve their internal operations
and add value to their organization. Organizations can thus focus on their objectives such
as enhancing performance, encouraging innovation, sharing and integrating lessons
learned for continuous improvement etc. M&E also streamlines organizational
procedures to achieve constructive coordination among different stakeholders and
organizational units.

Reports

A report is a document that presents information in an organized format for a specific
audience and purpose. Although summaries of reports may be delivered orally,
complete reports are almost always in the form of written documents.

Types of reports in an organization

Routine or Special:

A Routine Report is prepared and presented as a routine work and at a regular period of
time. For example, the annual report of an association or a company which has to be
prepared by the secretary or by the Board of Directors at the end of every financial year
and copies have to be distributed among the members.

A routine report contains some facts or information either in detail or in a summarized
form. It may also be of critical type containing some remark or opinion. For example,
the auditor’s report on the final accounts of a company. Departmental managers or
branch managers have to regularly submit routine reports to the higher authorities.
A Special Report is prepared and presented not as a matter of routine. This is prepared
on the basis of some enquiry or investigation either by a single individual or by a body
or a committee or a subcommittee or a commission specially formed or entrusted with
the duty

General or Confidential:

A General Report is that which is for distribution among many, like the members of an
organization- Such reports may be printed in large numbers or even published in
newspapers for the public information. The Government publishes reports of different
committees or commissions and places them on sale to the public.

A Confidential Report is meant for some superior person or persons and is not for general
information. Sometimes the report may be so confidential that the secretary or any other
person preparing it. Writes it by hand or types it out him-self.

Formal or Informal:

A Formal Report is that which is prepared according to some prescribed form and at a
prescribed time and is presented according to a conventional procedure. For example,
the annual report of a company or any association, a report of a branch to its head office,
etc.

Functions or importance of a report in an organization

Provides Information: The very purpose of preparing a report is providing
information to various levels of management. The term management includes
Foreman, Supervisor, Chairman, Department Manager, General Manager and Special
Officer. These people are getting information like trend of the business, cash flow and
fund flow etc.

Helps in Selection: Out of the many information available, only relevant information is
included in the report. A report brings many alternatives out of which a management
has to choose one profitable alternative.

Role in Control System: A target is fixed well in advance in an organization. The
management has to see whether the employees are working according to the targets and
standards. The reports are prepared in such a way as to measure the actual performance
with the budgeted targets. If there is any unfavorable variances, the reasons are find out
and remedial or corrective actions are taken by the management. In this way, a report is
used as a control tool. A management can control with the help of this tool.

Helpful in Profitable Operations: A report highlights the direction of moving the
business and the level of operation. On the basis of this type of report, a management
can give clear cut instructions as how to increase the profitability to its employees.

Follow the Principle of Management by Exception: A management has only a
minimum time to exercise control. Hence, the activities, which are not carried out
according to planning and budget, are highlighted before the management. This is the
way of following the principle of management by exception.

Helpful in Achieving Overall Objectives: Report motivates the executives and
employees to take necessary steps towards increasing the earnings of the organization
significantly. In this way, the management is achieving the maximum profit with the
help of reporting system.

Environment protection regulations

Environmental protection is the practice of protecting the natural environment by
individuals, organizations and governments. Its objectives are to conserve natural
resources and the existing natural environment and, where possible, to repair damage
and reverse trends

Waste disposal and management

Waste management or Waste disposal is all the activities and actions required to manage
waste from its inception to its final disposal. This includes amongst other things,
collection, transport, treatment and disposal of waste together with monitoring and
regulation. It also encompasses the legal and regulatory framework that relates to waste
management encompassing guidance on recycling etc.

The Benefits of Waste Management
There are multiple benefits to treating and managing waste. In this section, we will take
a closer look at them.

Better Environment

Probably the biggest advantage of managing waste is that it eventually leads to a better
and fresher environment.

Waste disposal units also contribute to the well-being of people by helping them become
disease-free. The best part: all of this happens while the unnecessary is duly disposed of
in a proper and sanitary manner. Multiple waste disposal units should be placed in tier-
1 and tier-2 cities in a bid to prep up the process of waste disposal. This will also help
implement remarkable safety measures in the long run.

Reduces Pollution

When waste is managed the right way, it doesn’t merely eliminate the subsequent waste
but also reduces the impact and the intensity of harmful greenhouse gases like carbon-
di-oxide, carbon mono-oxide, and methane that are often exuded from accumulated
wastes in landfills.

Managing waste reduces our reliance on landfills while also significantly cutting down
the many factors that adversely impact our environment.

Conserves Energy

Recycling is one of the biggest aspects of waste management, and over time, it helps
conserve energy. One of the biggest instances of this advantage can be traced to the
practice of recycling paper.

All of us are probably aware that thousands of trees are cut to produce paper. When a
used paper is recycled to create new paper, the need of cutting trees is significantly
minimized. This helps conserve energy while also reducing your carbon footprints.

Creates Employment
The recycling industry alone creates hundreds of jobs. As more people adopt this eco-
friendly practice, organizations creating and selling recycled products come to the
forefront. This helps boost their business while also creating hundreds of jobs.

Helps Make a Difference

By managing waste, you are also making a difference to the society and the world in
general. While none of us can completely get rid of garbage, we can always adopt eco-
friendly practices of reducing and reusing waste. This way, you create an example for
the people around you, who in turn are now motivated to embrace a sustainable
approach.




Source: R. (2020, May 29).

There are eight major categories of waste management, and each of them can be divided
into numerous sub-categories.
The categories include source reduction and reuse, animal feeding, recycling,
composting, fermentation, landfills, incineration, and land application. Some of these
methods like reduction and reuse can be started from the comfort of your homes.

Various Methods of Waste Disposal

Although there are many methods of disposing of waste, in this section let’s take a look
at some of the most commonly used methods that you should know about waste
management.

Landfills

Throwing daily waste/garbage in the landfills is the most popularly used method of waste
disposal used today. This process of waste disposal focuses attention on burying the
waste in the land. Landfills are commonly found in developing countries.

There is a process used that eliminates the odors and dangers of waste before it is placed
into the ground.

While it is true this is the most popular form of waste disposal, it is certainly far from
the only procedure and one that may also bring with it an assortment of space.

This method is becoming less these days although, thanks to the lack of space available
and the strong presence of methane and other landfill gases, both of which can cause
numerous contamination problems.

Landfills give rise to air and water pollution which severely affects the environment and
can prove fatal to the lives of humans and animals. Many areas are reconsidering the use
of landfills.

Incineration/Combustion

Incineration or combustion is a type disposal method in which municipal solid wastes
are burned at high temperatures. The process eventually converts them into residues and
gaseous products.

The biggest advantage of this type of method is that it can reduce the volume of solid
waste to 20 to 30 percent of the original volume. Additionally, it also decreases the space
they take up while also reducing the stress on landfills. Incinerators are primarily used
in thermal treatment where solid waste materials are converted to heat, gas, steam, and
ash. Incineration is also widely popular in countries where landfill space is no longer
available, such as the US and Japan.

Recovery and Recycling

Resource recovery is the process of taking useful discarded items for a specific next use.
These discarded items are then processed to extract or recover materials and resources
or convert them to energy in the form of useable heat, electricity or fuel. Recycling is
the process of converting waste products into new products to prevent energy usage and
consumption of fresh raw materials. Recycling is the third component of Reduce, Reuse
and Recycle waste hierarchy.

The idea behind recycling is to reduce energy usage, reduce the volume of landfills,
reduce air and water pollution, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and preserve natural
resources for future use.

Plasma gasification

Plasma gasification is another form of waste management. Plasma is primarily an
electrically charged or highly ionized gas. Lighting is one type of plasma that produces
temperatures that exceed 12,600 °F. With this method of waste disposal, a vessel uses
characteristic plasma torches operating at +10,000 °F which is creating a gasification
zone till 3,000 °F for the conversion of solid or liquid wastes into a syngas.

During the treatment of solid waste by plasma gasification, the waste’s molecular bonds
are broken down as a result of the intense heat in the vessels and the elemental
components.

Thanks to this process, the destruction of waste and dangerous materials are found. This
form of waste disposal provides renewable energy and an assortment of other fantastic
benefits.

Composting
Composting is an easy and natural bio-degradation process that takes organic wastes i.e.
remains of plants and garden and kitchen waste and turns into nutrient-rich food for your
plants.

Composting, normally used for organic farming, occurs by allowing organic materials
to sit in one place for months until microbes decompose it.

Note that composting is often deemed to be one of the best methods of waste disposal as
it can turn unsafe organic products into safe compost. The process, however, has its
downsides. Some people have found it to be slow, while others have observed that it
takes a lot of space. But regardless of these issues, many people are still embracing home
composting approaches to manage and reduce waste.and turns it to

Waste to Energy (Recover Energy)

Waste-to-Energy, also widely recognized by its acronym WtE is the generation of energy
in the form of heat or electricity from waste.

Waste to energy (WtE) process involves the conversion of non-recyclable waste items
into useable heat, electricity, or fuel through a variety of processes. This type of so
energy is a renewable energy source as non-recyclable waste can be used over and over
again to create it.

WtE can also help reduce carbon emissions by offsetting the need for energy from fossil
sources. Over time, this reduces global warming and makes our environment better.

Special Waste Disposal

There are certain waste types that are considered hazardous and cannot be disposed of
without special handling which will prevent contamination from occurring.

Biomedical waste is one example of such a waste disposal method. It is primarily
practiced in health care facilities and similar institutions. The special waste disposal
system effectively disposes of hazardous biomedical waste.

Avoidance/Waste Minimization
The easier method of waste management is to reduce the creation of waste materials
thereby reducing the amount of waste going to landfills.

Waste reduction can be done through recycling old materials like jar, bags, repairing
broken items instead of buying a new one, avoiding the use of disposable products like
plastic bags, reusing second-hand items, and buying items that use less designing.

The Best Methods of Waste Management

Recycling and composting are a couple of the best methods of waste management.
Composting is so far only possible on a small scale, either by private individuals or in
areas where waste can be mixed with farming soil or used for landscaping purposes.

Recycling, on the other hand, can be widely used around the world, with plastic, paper,
and metal leading the list of the most recyclable items. Most material recycled is reused
for its original purpose. In some instances, they may also be sold for generating profits.
References

Cappelli, P., “HR Implications of Healthcare Reform,” Human Resource Executive

         Online, March 29, 2010, accessed August 18,

          2011, http://www.hreonline.com/HRE/story.jsp?storyId=379096509.

Frasch, K. B., David Shadovitz, and Jared Shelly, “There’s No Whining in HR,” Human

         Resource Executive Online, June 30, 2009, accessed September 24,

          2010, http://www.hreonline.com/HRE/story.jsp?storyId=227738167.

Rivenbark, L., “The 7 Hidden Reasons Why Employees Leave,” HR Magazine, May
2005,

          accessed October 10,

          2010, http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m3495/is_5_50/ai_n13721406.

Buse K, Mays N, Walt G (2005). Making Health Policy. Understanding Public Health
Series




           Open University Press.

Gunn LA (1978). “Why is implantation so difficult?” Management Services in
Government, 33:




             169-76.

Hunter DJ (2003). Public Health Policy. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Jenkin RA, Jorm CM, Frommer MS (2013) Translating indicators and targets into public
health

            action. In: Guest C, Ricciardi W, Kawachi I, Lang I (eds) Oxford Handbook
of

             Public Health Practice, 3rd edition. Oxford University Press.

Powell AE, Davies HTO, Bannister J, Macrea WA (2009) “Understanding the challenges
of

             service change – learning from acute pain services in the UK.” Journal of
the Royal

             Society of Medicine, 102(2): 62-8

R. (2020, May 29). What is Waste Management and Various Methods of Waste
Disposal? Conserve Energy Future. https://www.conserve-energy-future.com/waste-
management-and-waste-disposal-methods.php

Wotela, K. (2017). A proposed monitoring and evaluation curriculum based on a model
that institutionalises monitoring and evaluation. African Evaluation Journal, 5(1).
https://doi.org/10.4102/aej.v5i1.186

Special issue of the International Journal of Human Resource Management: Digitization
and the transformation of human resource management. (2018). The International
Journal         of         Human           Resource          Management,           1–5.
https://doi.org/10.1080/09585192.2018.1503845

Lunenburg, F. C., & Ornstein, A. (2021). Educational Administration: Concepts and
Practices (7th ed.). SAGE Publications, Inc.

Nicholson, JD, W. C. (2005). Standard operating procedures. Journal of Emergency
Management, 3(6), 25. https://doi.org/10.5055/jem.2005.0060

Reed, M. E. (2000). Policies and procedures governing the use of new devices in
operating       rooms.        Aesthetic          Surgery,      20(3),        0258–0259.
https://doi.org/10.1067/maj.2000.107329
Impact of Motivation on Employees. (2016). International Journal of Science and
Research (IJSR), 5(2), 1836–1839. https://doi.org/10.21275/v5i2.nov161570
CHAPTER 10 MAINTAINANCE




                   REPUBLIC OF KENYA




                    LEARNING GUIDE




                          FOR




          PERIOPERATIVE THEATRE TECHNOLOGY
     LEVEL 6




   TVET CDACC

P.O. BOX 15745-00100

     NAIROBI
First published 2020

©Copyright TVET CDACC



All rights reserved. No part of this learning guide may be reproduced, distributed, or
transmitted in any form or by any means, including photocopying, recording, or other
electronic or mechanical methods without the prior written permission of the TVET
CDACC, except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical reviews and certain
other non-commercial uses permitted by copyright law. For permission requests, write to
the Council Secretary/CEO, at the address below:




Council Secretary/CEO

TVET Curriculum Development, Assessment and Certification Council

P.O. Box 15745–00100

Nairobi, Kenya

Email: info@tvetcdacc.go.ke

Website: www.tvetcdacc.go.ke




                                         752
                                   CHAPTER TEN

 MAINTENANCE OF PERIOPERATIVE THEATRE INSTRUMENTS AND
                      APPARATUS
Unit of learning code: HE/CU/TT/CR/03/6/A

Related Unit of Competency in Occupational Standard: Maintain Perioperative
Theatre instruments and apparatus.

1.1 Introduction to the unit of learning

This unit standard specifies the competencies required in maintaining perioperative
theatre instruments and apparatus. It involves necessary precautions importantly
followed in the context of operation theatre setting to avoid breakage, accidents, and
infection. It also includes general repair of Operation theatre instruments and apparatuses

Upon completion of this unit the learner will be able to prepare to dis-assemble and
assemble perioperation theatre instruments, check and assemble perioperation theatre
instruments, pack and sterilize perioperation theatre instruments, store operation theatre
instruments and apparatus, evaluate care of instruments and apparatuses in Perioperation
theatre.



  Learning Outcome 1: Prepare to dis-assemble and assemble Perioperation
  Theatre instruments

Introduction


                                          753
This unit trainees will train how to adhere to safety practices in Operation Theatre, tools
for dis-assembling and assembling theatre instruments and apparatus, classification of
surgical instrument and Operation Theatre Practice

Definition of key terms

Alloy: A combination of several different kinds of metals. Alloys are used in the
manufacture of stainless steel.

Box lock: The hinge point of many surgical instruments.

Chisel: An orthopedic instrument used to slice bone; one side is straight and the other is
beveled.

Curettage: The removal of tissue by scraping with a surgical curette.

Dilator: Graduated, smooth instrument that is used to increase the diameter of an
anatomical opening in tissue.

 Double-action rongeur: A bone-cutting instrument with two hinges in the middle. This
increases leverage and strength of the instrument.

Elevator: A straight instrument with curved sharp or dull tip used to separate tissue
layers such as periosteum from bone.

Gouge: A V-shaped bone chisel. Hemostat: A surgical clamp most often used to occlude
a blood vessel.

Rongeur: A hinged instrument with sharp, cup-shaped tips that is used to extract pieces
of bone or other connective tissue. Serosa: The delicate outer layer of tissue of most
organs.

Anodized: The instrument is exposed to conditions that cause an oxide coating that is
relatively impenetrable to atmospheric oxygen. Instruments can be anodized to reduce
reflections. Atraumatic: Without injury.

Crushing: Destructive effects of specific instruments. Some procedures require the use
of crushing clamps. Cutting Separating with a sharp instrument or device.

Debulking: Decrease in mass or volume using an instrument or device.

Dilation: Enlarging an opening in a progressive manner.
                                          754
Dissection: Process of separating tissues through anatomic planes by using sharp or
blunt instrumentation.

Evacuating: Emptying a cavity or space.

Grasping Holding in a traumatic or atraumatic manner.

Instillation: Fluid is slowly introduced into a cavity or space.

Occlusion: Closing a lumen for the purpose of the procedure. The closure can be
permanent or temporary.

Percutaneous: Enter directly through the skin; without incision.

Retraction: Stabilizing a tissue layer in a safe position for exposure of a part. A retractor
can be manual or self-retaining.

Shank: The area of a surgical instrument between the box lock and the finger ring.
Single-action rongeur: A heavy cutting instrument that has one hinge.

Tenaculum: A grasping instrument with sharp pointed tips, generally used to manipulate
or grasp tissue such as the thyroid or cervix.

Content/methodology/illustrations

Instrument Categorization

Surgical instruments are one of the most important components of a surgical procedure,
and they are quite literally an extension of the practitioner’s hands. When the surgical
team is appropriately acquainted with the name, function and proper handling of the
multitude of instruments available to them, it not only enhances the surgical procedure,
but it positively shapes the entire experience for the ultimate end user – the patient.

All instruments are categorized by function. The nine categories are: Accessory;
Clamping and Occluding; Cutting and Dissecting; Grasping and Holding; Dilating and
Probing; Exposing and Retracting; Aspirating and Suctioning; Stapling and Suturing;
and Viewing.

Accessory: An accessory is any instrument that does not fit into a category, but is an
important part of the surgical procedure and has a specific function. Examples of
accessories are: mallets, harmonic scalpels and guide pins.

                                           755
Clamping and Occluding: Used to compress or close blood vessels or hollow organs,
for hemostasis or occlusion. Examples are: Crile hemostatic forceps and tube occluding
clamps.

 Cutting and Dissecting: Used to separate or incise, dissect or excise soft or compact
tissue with a variety of cutting edges and designs. Examples are: scalpels, Iris scissors
and curettes.

Grasping and Holding: Grasping and holding instruments are designed to grip,
manipulate and stabilize body tissues. They may also be used to extract foreign bodies.
Examples are: Allis tissue forceps, and Backhaus towel clamps.

Dilating and Probing: These instruments are used to probe, expand, examine or create
an anatomic passage; to enlarge or open a stricture or introduce another instrument.
Examples are: Hank uterine dilator, Sklar mini-dilators/OS finders and probes with eyes.

 Exposing and Retracting: Designed to pull aside or hold back wound edges and other
tissues to gain access to the surgery or operation site. These instruments are usually
called “retractors,” with blunt “blades” that may be curved or angled, or with sharp or
dull prongs. Blades vary in size, and some retractors are double ended or come in a
variety of shapes, lengths and widths depending on functional needs. Examples are: bone
hooks, Volkman retractors and Zalkind retractors.

Aspirating and Suctioning: Aspirating and suctioning instruments are used to remove
blood and other fluids and debris from the operating site. These instruments are hollow
tipped and come in a variety of sizes and shapes for ease of access. Examples are:
cannulas, aspiration suction tubes.

 Stapling and Suturing: Used to align, secure and approximate the edges of soft or
compact tissue for healing; they may employ implants like sutures, staples, clips wires
or screws. Examples are: needle holders, suture needles and terminal end staplers.

Viewing: Viewing instruments allow the practitioner to illuminate a cavity or structure
such as a nasal cavity. Examples include: endoscopes, nasal specula and lighted vaginal
specula.

Content/Procedures/methods/illustrations

Classification of surgical instrument



                                         756
Various basic maneuvers are common to all surgical procedures. The surgeon dissects,
resects, or alters tissues and/or organs to restore or repair bodily functions or body parts.
Bleeding must be controlled during the process. Surgical instruments are designed to
provide the tools the surgeon needs for each maneuver. Whether they are small or large,
short or long, straight or curved, sharp or blunt, all instruments can be classified by their
function. Because the nomenclature is not standardized, the names of specific
instruments must be learned in the clinical practice setting. All instruments should be
used only for their intended purpose, and they should not be abused.



Dissecting and Cutting Instruments Dissection instruments have sharp edges. They
are used to cut, incise, separate, or excise tissues. There are two types of dissecting
instruments: sharp and blunt. Sharp dissecting instruments should be kept separate from
other instruments, and the sharp edges should be protected during cleaning, sterilizing,
and storing. To prevent injury to the handler and damage to the sharp edges, proper
precautions are necessary to take during the handling or disposing of all sharps, blades,
or scalpels.



Scalpels

The type of scalpel most commonly used has a reusable handle with a disposable blade.
Most handles are made of brass; the blades may be made of carbon steel. Blades vary by
size and shape (Fig. 19-1); handles vary by width and length (Fig. 19-2). Blades with a
numeric prefix of “1” as in a “10” series (e.g., 10, 11, 12, and 15) fit handle size number
3 or 7. Blades with a numeric prefix of “2” as in “20” series (e.g., 20, 22, or 25) fit handle
size number 4. Disposable scalpels also are available, but are not weighted the same as
metal handles. Most surgeons prefer reusable metal scalpel handles. Blade is attached to
a reusable handle by slipping the blade into the grooves on the narrow edge of the handle.
An instrument, never the fingers, is used to attach and detach the blade; this instrument,
usually a heavy hemostat or Kelly clamp, should not touch the cutting edge. Needle
holders are not designed to load scalpel blades and the jaws can become misaligned by
excess torque. The following are descriptions of blade and scalpel combinations:

  • Number 10 blades are rounded toward the tip and are often used to open the skin.
  • Number 11 blades have a linear edge with a sharp tip. Can be used to make the initial
 skin puncture for tiny deep incisions.
  • Number 12 blades have a curved cutting surface like a hook. Commonly used for
 tonsillectomy.
                                           757
  • Number 15 blades have a short rounded edge for shallow short controlled incisions.
  • Number 20 blades are shaped similar to number 10 blades but larger.
 An assortment of blades with angulations and configurations for specific uses, such as
 a Beaver blade, also are used. These blades insert into a special universal handle that
 secures by turning a screw-in collar.

Figure 1: Diagram of different sizes of surgical blades




Knives

 Knives come in various sizes and configurations. Like a kitchen paring knife, they
 usually have a blade at one end that may have one or two cutting edges. The knives are
 designed for very specific purposes (e.g., cataract knife). Other types of knives have
 detachable and replaceable blades (e.g., dermatome). A knife blade may be
 incorporated into a multifunctional instrument, such as a gastrointestinal anastomosis
 (GIA) or end-to-end anastomosis (EEA) stapler that cuts and staples tissue
 simultaneously.
 Figure 2: Diagram of a cataract knife


                                        758
Scissors
The blades of scissors may be straight, angled, or curved, as well as serrated, wedge-
shaped, sharp, blunt, or combined sharp-blunt tips.
The handles may be long or short. Some scissors are used only to cut or dissect tissues;
others are used to cut other materials. To maintain sharpness of the cutting edges and
proper alignment of the blades, scissors should be used only for their intended purpose:
 • Tissue/dissecting scissors have sharp or blunt tips. The type and location of tissue to
be cut determine which scissors the surgeon will use. Blades needed to cut tough tissues
are heavier than those needed to cut fine, delicate structures. Curved or angled blades
are needed to reach under or around structures.
 • Tissue scissors with blunt tips can be used to bluntly dissect between individual
planes before sharply dissecting. Handles to reach deep into body cavities are longer
than those needed for superficial tissues.
 • Suture scissors have sharp-blunt points to prevent structures close to the suture from
being cut. The scrub person may use scissors to cut sutures during preparation if
needed.
 • Wire scissors have short, heavy serrated blades. Wire scissors are used instead of
suture scissors to cut stainless steel sutures. Heavy wire cutters are used to cut bone
fixation wires.

Figure 3: Diagram of a dissecting scissor (a) and parts of atypical scissor in (b)




                                         759
(a)                                                                                   (b)




  Short jaw sharp-tipped scissors are used for deep, confined areas such as the nasal
cavity.
 Sharp-tipped angled scissors with short jaws are used for vascular surgery.
 Dressing/bandage scissors are used to cut drains and dressings and to open items such
as plastic packets. The protective tip prevents cutting into concealed structures.
 Small scissors with especially wedge-shaped tips such as tenotomy scissors used for
blunt and sharp dissection.
 Cutters and Saws
Many types of instruments have cutting edges suitable for cutting into or through bone
and cartilage. Some have moving parts, such as rib cutters. Others, such as drills, saws,
and reamers, are powered by air or electricity and have disposable tips and blades.
 Blunt Dissectors
Friable tissues or tissue planes can be separated by blunt dissection. The scalpel handle,
the blunt sides of tissue scissors blades, and dissecting sponges may be used for this
purpose. Elevators, strippers, and dissectors can be used to remove adherent tissue such
as periosteum from bone or dura from the inner aspect of the skull.
Debulking Instruments Debulking instruments include curettes, chisels, osteotomes,
gouges, rasps, and files. The purpose of these instruments is to decrease the bulk of
firm tissue and not necessarily cut along defined tissue planes.



                                         760
Figure 4 above showing the diagram of an Osteotome

 Biopsy forceps and punches
A small piece of tissue for pathologic examination may be removed with a biopsy
forceps
Curettes
 Soft tissue or bone is removed by scraping with the sharp edge of the loop, ring, or
scoop on the end of a curette.
 Snares
 A loop of wire may be put around a pedicle to dissect tissue such as a tonsil or a polyp.
The wire cuts the pedicle as it retracts into the instrument. The wire is discarded and
replaced with a new one after use.
Grasping and Holding Instruments
Tissues should be grasped a traumatically and held in position so the surgeon can
perform the desired maneuver, such as dissecting or suturing (approximating), without
injuring the surrounding subcutaneous tissues or perforating the skin. Forceps without
ring handles are commonly referred to as pick-ups. Delicate Forceps Fine tissues such
as eye tissue are held with delicate forceps. They can be toothed or smooth, straight or
angled.
Adson Forceps
Forceps are used to pick up or hold soft tissues in approximation during closure. They
can be toothed or smooth.
Bayonet Forceps
Forceps are angled like a bayonet to prevent the user’s hand from occluding vision in
a small space.
Tissue Forceps Also referred to as thumb forceps or pick-ups, smooth forceps
resemble tweezers. They are tapered and have serrations (grooves) at the tip. They may
be straight or bayonet (angled), short or long, and delicate or heavy. Smooth forceps
are atraumatic and will not injure delicate structures.
Toothed Tissue Forceps
Toothed forceps differ from smooth forceps at the tip. Rather than being serrated, they
have a single tooth on one side that fits between two teeth on the opposing side or they
have a row of multiple teeth at the tip. Heavy types are sometimes referred to as rat-
                                         761
toothed forceps. Toothed forceps provide a firm hold on tough tissues, including skin.
Finer versions have delicate teeth for holding more delicate tissue. Care is taken not to
perforate the epidermis or dermis when holding tissue.
Allis Forceps
Allis forceps have ringed handles and lock with ratchets. Each jaw curves slightly
inward, and there is a row of teeth at the end. The teeth grasp tissue edges securely.
Allis forceps can be short or long. Some of the long forceps have a slight curve, such
as those used with a hemorrhoid band ligator.
Babcock Forceps
Babcock forceps have ringed handles and lock with ratchets. The end of each jaw of a
Babcock forceps is rounded to fit around a tubular structure (i.e., fallopian tube) or to
grasp tissue without injury. This rounded section is circumferentially fenestrated.
Babcock forceps are straight and can be short or long; they are not occlusive or
crushing.
Lahey Forceps: Lahey forceps have ringed handles and lock with ratchets. The jaws
of the Lahey forceps have sharp apposing points for grasping tough organs or tumors
during excision. They are not occlusive or crushing.
Stone Forceps: Either curved or straight forceps are used to grasp polyps or calculi
such as kidney stones or gallstones. Stone forceps have blunt loops or cups at the end
of the jaws and do not have ratchets.
Tenaculums
 Tenaculums have ringed handles and lock with ratchets and may have a single tooth
or multiple teeth, such as a Jacob tenaculum. The curved or angled points on the ends
of the jaws tenaculums penetrate tissue to grasp firmly, such as when a uterine
tenaculum is attached to the cervix and used to manipulate the uterus during
laparoscopy. Some uterine tenaculums have a built-in uterine cannula or probe elevator
tip, such as a Hulka tenaculum. A uterine cannula, or probe, can be used during
laparoscopy to raise the uterus into the visual field. The cannula tip is inserted into the
cervical OS as the tenaculum is clamped on the anterior aspect of the cervix. Dye or
contrast media can be instilled through the cannula into the uterine cavity to visualize
tubal patency or the inner configuration of the uterine cavity. Some styles have a
tenaculum stabilizer tip attached.
Bone Holders Grasping forceps
 Vice-Grip pliers, and other types of heavy holding forceps stabilize bone. Some styles
have ring handles and locking ratchets. Others have compression grips and do not lock.
Clamping and Occluding Instruments
Instruments that clamp and occlude are used to apply pressure. Some clamps are
designed to crush the structure as the instrument is applied and are considered
traumatic. The clamped crushed structure is usually sewn, clipped, or electro
coagulated and then removed. Other clamps are non-crushing (atraumatic) and are used
                                         762
to occlude or secure tissue, which is restored to patency at some point during the
surgical procedure. Hemostatic Clamps Most clamps used for occluding blood vessels
have two opposing jaws (with or without serrations or teeth), ringed handles, and lock
with ratchets. Most ring-handled clamps have a common design. The length and shape
of the shanks or jaws may vary according to the intended function of the instrument.
 Hemostats
Hemostats are the most commonly used surgical instruments and are used primarily to
clamp blood vessels. They have a crushing action. Hemostats have either straight or
curved slender jaws that taper to a fine point. The serrations are longitudinal or
horizontal inside the jaws.
Crushing Clamps
Many variations of hemostatic forceps are used to crush tissues or clamp blood vessels.
The jaws may be straight, curved, or angled, and the serrations may be horizontal,
diagonal, or longitudinal. The tip may be pointed or rounded or have a tooth along the
jaw such as on a Heaney clamp or hysterectomy clamps length of the jaws and handles
varies.
Many forceps are named for the surgeon who designed the style, such as the Kocher
and the Ochsner clamps. Some instruments are designed to be used on specific organs.
The features of the instrument will determine its use. Fine tips are needed for small
vessels and structures. Longer and sturdier jaws are needed for larger vessels, dense
structures, and thick tissue. Longer shanks are needed to reach structures deep in body
cavities. Tissue that has been crushed is usually sutured or stapled.
Noncrushing Clamps
Noncrushing clamps are used to occlude bowel or major blood vessels temporarily,
which minimizes tissue trauma. The jaws of these types of clamps have opposing rows
of fine serrations, but have a softer hold on tissues. The jaws may be straight, curved,
angled, or S-shaped.
Retracting and Exposing Instruments Soft tissues, muscles, and other structures should
be pulled aside for exposure of the intended surgical site. Manual Retractors Most
handheld retractors have an ergonomic handle and blade. The term blade should not be
confused with scalpel. The blades vary in width and length to correspond to the size
and depth of the incision. The curved or angled blade may be solid for body wall
retraction (i.e., Mayo, Richardson, or Kelly retractors), fenestrated like a wire whisk
for delicate tissue retraction (i.e., lung retractor), or pronged like a rake for raising tissue
edges (i.e., Freeman facelift retractor). The prongs on the blades of a rake can be dull
or sharp. Some retractors have different sized blades at both ends with a handle in the
middle. Other retractors have traction grooves or serrations for slippery surfaces such
as the tongue malleable retractor is a flat length of low-carbon stainless steel, silver, or
silver-plated copper that may be bent to the desired angle and depth for retraction.
Referred to as ribbon retractors, they can be found in assorted widths from 1/2 inch to
                                           763
4 inches. Some malleable blades attach into self-retaining or bed mounted retractors.
Hooks Single, double, or multiple very fine hooks with sharp points are used to retract
delicate structures. Hooks are commonly used to retract skin edges during a wide-flap
dissection such as a facelift or mastectomy.
 Some styles of hooks have ball tips, which cause less trauma to tissues. Some hook
styles have elastic attachments that are mounted into a preformed frame over the
incision. Care is taken not to perforate the epidermis or dermis when using a hook
retractor. Only the subcutaneous tissue is held back.
Retaining Retractors
 Holding devices with two or more flat or hooked blades can be inserted to spread the
edges of an incision and hold them apart. For example, a rib spreader holds the chest
open during a thoracic or cardiac procedure with flat blades. A self-retaining retractor
may have shallow or deep blades. Some retractors have ratchets or spring locks to keep
the device open; others have wing nuts to secure the blades. Some self-retaining
retractors have interchangeable blades of different sizes. Each part of the self-retaining
retractor is accounted for at the end of the surgical procedure. Detachable blades or
wing nuts can be lost during closure. Bed-Mounted Retractors Some self-retaining
retractors can be attached to the operating bed for stability when a long surgical incision
is planned. A bed-mounted retractor is packaged and sterilized separately in one or two
trays because of the numerous blades and attachments. All of the parts are counted
items. The component parts include an assortment of blades, connecting ratchets, a
mounting frame for the blades, and an upright post that attaches to the side rail of the
operating bed at the level of the mattress. The scrub person passes the attaching end of
the upright post to the circulating nurse who securely connects the post to the OR bed
frame with a screw-bolt. The attached end touched by the circulating nurse is no longer
sterile. The upright part of the post remains sterile and the mounting frame is attached
by the surgeon at the working height desired. The individual blades and ratchets are
placed by the surgeon and the first assistant to attain the exposure needed to perform
the surgical procedure. Bed-mounted retractors are useful in preventing fatigue of the
team for long procedures. Care is taken to prevent the upright post from resting against
the patient’s body. Permanent nerve injury can result from prolonged pressure of an
immobile post against a nerve during the surgical procedure.
Needle Holders
 Most needle holders have ring handles and locking ratchets. They are used to grasp
and hold curved surgical needles. Most needle holders resemble hemostatic forceps;
the basic difference is the shortness of the jaws. A needle holder has short, sturdy jaws
for grasping a needle without damaging it or the suture material. The jaws are usually
straight, but they may be curved or angled. The inner surfaces of the jaws also may
differ such as crosshatched, serrated, or have a central notch for stability. The size of


                                         764
the needle holder should match the size of the needle (i.e. heavy jaws for large needles
and slim jaws for small needles)
Needle holders can be constructed of various lengths and weights. Heavy snub-nosed
needle holders are useful for stainless steel sutures. Long-handled needle holders
facilitate needle placement in surgical sites such as the pelvis or chest. Short needle
holders are used superficially on the skin or subcuticular tissue. Specialty needle
holders may have spring handles with or without locks. The jaws of the micro needle
holders used for ophthalmic surgery and microsurgery may be either diamond-cut or
crosshatched. They can be curved, angled, or straight. A needle holder should not be
placed on a magnetic pad because it may become magnetized and cause needle release
problems when suturing. Tungsten Carbide Jaws Tungsten carbide is a hard metal. Jaws
with an insert of solid tungsten carbide with diamond-cut precision teeth are designed
specifically to eliminate the twisting and turning of the needle in the needle holder.
 These diamond-jaw needle holders can be identified by the gold plating on the handles.
Crosshatched Jaws
The serrations on the inside surface of the jaws are crisscrossed rather than grooved.
Crosshatching provides a smoother surface and prevents damage to the needle.
Winged Instruments Surgeons can examine the interior of body cavities, hollow organs,
or structures with viewing instruments and can perform many procedures through them.
Speculums The hinged, blunt blades of a speculum enlarge and hold open a canal (e.g.,
vagina, rectum or a cavity (e.g., nose. An ear speculum is like a funnel.
Endoscopes
The round or oval sheath of an endoscope is inserted into a body orifice (rigid or
flexible) or through a small percutaneous skin incision guided by a trocar assembly
(rigid). Each type of endoscope is designed for viewing in a specific anatomic location.
Many accessory instruments and robotics are used through endoscopes.
 Hollow Endoscopes
In a hollow endoscope, the rigid hollow sheath permits viewing in a forward direction
through the endoscope (i.e. bronchoscope, esophagoscope, or sigmoidoscope). The
sheath is made of brass, stainless steel, or plastic. A light carrier supplied by a fiberoptic
cable provides illumination. A working space is created by manual insufflation of air.
Lensed Endoscopes Lensed endoscopes have either rigid or flexible sheaths, and they
have an eyepiece with a telescopic lens system for viewing in several directions.
Lighting is provided through fiberoptic cable and an electric light source with
extremely bright lamps. Used in combination with video-assisted technology,
computerization permits recording action videos and still digital photography. Many
endoscopes have working channels for performing specialized procedures. Lensed
instruments are complex and require careful handling to avoid damage.
 Aspiration, Instillation, and Irrigation Instruments Blood, body fluids, tissue, and
irrigating solution may be removed by mechanical suction or manual aspiration.
                                           765
Reusable suction tips aspiration devices have lumens that are difficult to terminally
clean and sterilize. Many of these items are available in disposable models.
Aspiration
Aspiration, or suction, involves the application of negative pressure (less than
atmospheric pressure) for evacuating blood or fluids, usually for visibility at the
surgical site. An appropriate style tip is attached to sterile tubing; many tips are
disposable. The style of the suction tip depends on where it is to be used and the
surgeon’s preference. Disposable styles are preferred because the inner lumen is
difficult to clean. Blood, body fluid, or tissue may be aspirated manually to obtain a
specimen for laboratory examination or to obtain bone marrow for transplantation.
Suction is often performed with a needle and syringe.

Poole Abdominal Tip
The Poole abdominal suction tip is a straight hollow tube with a perforated outer filter
shield. It is used during abdominal laparotomy or within any cavity in which copious
amounts of fluid or pus are encountered. The outer filter shield prevents the adjacent
tissues from being pulled into the suction apparatus. This outer shield is completely
removable.
Frazier Tip
The Frazier tip is a right-angle tube with a small diameter. It is used when encountering
little or no fluid except capillary bleeding and irrigating fluid, such as in brain, spinal,
plastic, or orthopedic procedures. The Frazier tip keeps the field dry without the need
for sponging. One model has a connection for an electrosurgical unit, and the tip can
be used for fulguration. A fiberoptic cable can be attached to another model. The
vacuum exerted by the suction is controlled by a small hole that is covered by the thumb
in the handgrip of the Frazier.
Yankauer Tip
 The Yankauer tip is a hollow tube that has an angled shaft and a perforated round-ball
tip. This suction tip is also referred to as tonsil suction. Large quantities of blood and
fluid can be suctioned quickly with a Yankauer tip, which is useful for visualization
during ruptured aneurysms. Reusable Yankauer suction tips have a removable end cap
that screws on. This must be accounted for at the end of the procedure. It is easily lost
in a patient.
Trocar
 A trocar assembly may be needed to cut through tissues for access to fluid or a body
cavity. A trocar has two parts—a sharp obturator and a sheath or a blunt obturator and
sheath. The sharp obturator with the sheath is used to perforate the tissues. When the
trocar assembly is in place the obturator is removed, leaving the sheath in position and
creating a stented tunnel for drainage of fluids, introduction of instrumentation, or


                                          766
instillation of medication. Some trocars have suction ports, such as is used for draining
the gallbladder.
Endoscopic instruments may be manipulated through special trocars that have valves
for insufflation, irrigation, and aspiration.
Cannula
A cannula with a blunt end and perforations around the tip may be used to aspirate fluid
without cutting into tissue. Cannulae also are used to open blocked vessels or ducts for
drainage or to shunt blood flow from the surgical site.
Dilating and Probing Instruments
Malleable copper and brass dilators and probes can be plated with chromium or silver.
A set of Hank, Hawkins, Pratt, or Hegar dilators are used to dilate the uterine cervix. A
probe is used to explore a path in the structure or to locate an obstruction. Probes are
used to explore the depth of a wound or to trace the path of a fistula. Probes and dilation
instruments used as tunneling devices can make a passage under the skin for a vascular
graft or shunt.
Measuring Instruments Rulers, depth gauges, templates, and trial sizers are used to
measure parts of the patient’s body.
Instruments many accessories are used in addition to the basic instruments previously
discussed. For example, a mallet may be needed to drive a cutting instrument into bone.
Screwdrivers are used to affix screws into bone. Each surgical specialty has its own
accessories, many of which are described in the specialty chapters. One example is the
Hudson brace that is used to manually drill through the cranium
 Of the thousands of instruments available, surgeons choose those that are most suitable
to meet their particular needs. Differences in the size, curvature, or angulation of jaws
or blades; in the length of handles; and in the weight and shape of the instruments can
simplify, improve, and even shorten surgical time, which ultimately benefits the
patient. Instruments should be maintained to provide the specific function each has
been designed to do.
Microinstrumentation
Improved outcomes of surgical intervention using microsurgical techniques are to a
great extent the result of the miniaturized precision instrumentation developed in
association with the performance of these delicate procedures. The instruments are
extremely fine, delicate, and miniature enough to handle in the very small working
areas, such as the eye, spine, brain, or other body parts requiring microsurgery.
Manipulation becomes more difficult with increased size or bulk and weight. As with
techniques, instruments are constantly being improved. Surgeons work with
manufacturers to develop appropriate instruments, suture materials, and needles. Many
surgeons purchase the instruments of their choice. Whether owned by the surgeon or
the facility, microinstruments require exacting care to maintain desired function.
Instruments are designed to conform to hand movements under the microscope. They
                                         767
 must permit secure grasp, ease of holding and manipulation, and fulfillment of their
 intended purpose. They are shaped to not obscure the limited field of view. Although
 these factors are important criteria for any instrument, they are especially vital for
 microinstruments. Everyone assisting in or setting up for microsurgical procedures
 must know the identification and functions of these unique instruments. Design is
 coincident to function. Material and Surface Microinstruments are made of stainless
 steel or titanium. Titanium alloy is considerably stronger yet lighter weight than
 stainless steel. Some microinstruments are malleable for desired angling. Some are
 disposable. All are extremely vulnerable to abuse. Finishes of at least the portions of
 instruments exposed to light in the surgical field are deliberately dulled during
 manufacture to reduce glare under the microscope, which is both annoying and tiring
 to the surgeon. Titanium microinstruments have a dull blue finish. Shape and Tips
 Microinstruments are shorter than standard instruments and often are angulated for
 convenience of approach and avoidance of obstruction of the surgical field. Instrument
 tips have minimal separation, which is compatible with their function. Finger pressure
 and movement necessary to close wide tips are undesirable, because they may induce
 tremor. Handles
 Handles are designed for a secure and comfortable grasp, with a diameter comparable
 to that of a pen or pencil. Minimal diameter between fingers facilitates feel and
 accuracy of manipulation. Double-handled instruments (scissors, needle holders) have
 a slightly larger diameter than single-handled ones (razor knife). The shape of the
 handle is also important for manipulation. For example, instruments that are rotated
 between fingers when in use, such as forceps, must be turned easily. Their handles
 therefore are rounded or have six sides like a pencil. Those that are not rotated have
 finger grips or are flattened. Ring-handled instruments are not practical in
 microsurgery. Many instruments, particularly scissors and some needle holders, have
 spring handles that return tips to the open position between cutting or grasping
 functions. The distance from hinge to tip will vary according to function. Proper spring
 tension can be easily ruined by mishandling. Handles should be long enough for
 comfort in the working position but must not extend beyond the working distance to
 contact the unsterile objective of the microscope. The maximum length of most
 microinstruments is about 4 inches (100 mm). Gripping surfaces should be functionally
 located to prevent fingers from slipping during manipulation. These surfaces serve as
 a guide to accurate finger positioning. The gripping area may have a six-sided, round,
 knurled, or flat and serrated surface. Tactile sense is important to the procedure so the
 surgeon does not have to look at the instrument to use it.

Self-assessment



                                         768
 1. What is the relationship between the characteristics of a particular type of tissue
    and the instruments that are used on that tissue?
 2. On what types of tissue would you not use an instrument with teeth (one that
    punctures)?
 3. What is the advantage of having a right-angled instrument?
 4. What is the most efficient way to learn the names of surgical instruments?
 5. Describe a tenaculum.
 6. List the correct scalpel blade numbers and their handles.
 7. How would you protect the cutting edges of instruments from damage during
    surgery?
 8. What is the function of a self-retaining retractor?
 9. Describe your personal plan for learning the names and uses of instruments.


Case study

As a student, you are scrubbed on a large case. Your preceptor has shown you which
instruments will be needed during the case. As the preceptor names the instruments, you
remember only a few of the names. To make matters more difficult, the preceptor does
not tell you the technical name of the instruments but refers to them by the nicknames
used at this hospital. What strategies might you use to pass the correct instrument even
though you do not know the name?



Reference

Nilsen E: Managing equipment and instruments in the operating room, AORN Journal
81:349, 2005.

Spry C: Care and handling of basic surgical instruments, AORN Journal 86:S77, 2007.




                                         769
  Learning outcome 2: Check and assemble OT instruments and apparatus

This unit trainees will train how to establishing the working condition of Operation
Theatre instruments, impact knowledge and skills of referral of faulty Operation Theatre
instruments, assemble various parts of Operation Theatre instruments and apparatus
conduct Operation Theatre practice and pack and sterilize Operation Theatre instruments

Inspecting surgical instruments

The surgical technologist takes a proactive role in checking instruments for safety and
correct operation. This can be done while instruments are being prepared for a procedure,
or after the procedure when instruments are sorted and prepared for terminal disinfection.
Stainless steel instruments can be damaged mechanically or structurally, or there can be
defects on the surface that lead to weakness or cross-infection.

Damaged instruments must be withdrawn from service because they can lead to patient
injury, lost operating time, and increased expense.

Scissors

Look for pitting, chipping, and fractures along the blade edges. Vertical cracks in the
blade tine are serious and may mean that the instrument cannot be repaired.

Check that the scissor tips meet precisely and are not bent or chipped. Sharp dissection
scissors can develop burrs on the tips, usually from misuse or rough handling with
heavier instruments. When the scissors are opened and closed, there should be no
grinding of tips or shanks, which would indicate rough edges or bent tines. 3. The center
screw of the scissors can become worn with time. When the scissors are opened and
closed, they should feel snug but not tight at the center screw. 4. Test the blades for
sharpness by cutting through a surgical glove. There should be no resistance, and the
blade should cut a straight line. Remove dull scissors from active use as soon as a defect
is noticed.

     Anesthetic machine or Boyle's machine is used by anesthesiologists to support
     administration of anaesthesia



                                          770
The most common type of anesthetic machine is designed to provide an accurate
and continuous supply of medical gases (such as oxygen and nitrous oxide) mixed
with an accurate concentration of anaesthetic vapour (such as isoflurane), and
deliver this to the patient at a safe pressure and flow.

Modern machines incorporate a ventilator, suction unit, and patient monitoring
devices.

The original concept of Boyle's machine was invented by the British anesthetist
Henry Boyle (1875–1941) in 1917.

Components of an Anesthesia machine

A modern anaesthesia machine includes the following components:

Connections to piped hospital oxygen, medical air, and nitrous oxide.

Reserve gas cylinders of oxygen, air, and nitrous oxide attached via a specific yoke
with a Bodok seal.

A high-flow oxygen flush which provides pure oxygen at 30-75 litres/minute

Pressure gauges, regulators and 'pop-off' valves, to protect the machine components
and patient from high-pressure gases

Flow meters (rota meters) for oxygen, air, and nitrous oxide, low Flow meters for
oxygen

nitrous oxide

Updated vaporizers to provide accurate dosage control when using volatile
anaesthetics

An integrated ventilator to properly ventilate the patient during administration of
anaesthesia

A manual ventilation bag in combination with an Adjustable Pressure Limiting
(APL) valve

Systems for monitoring the gases being administered to, and exhaled by the patient



                                    771
     Systems for monitoring the patient's heart rate, ECG, blood pressure and oxygen
     saturation, in some cases with additional options for monitoring end-tidal carbon
     dioxide and temperature.

 — An anesthesia machine is a device which is used to deliver a precisely known but
   variable gas mixture including anesthetic and life-sustaining gases to the patient's
   respiratory system
 — Generally, a variable concentration gas mixture of oxygen, nitrous oxide and
   anesthetic vapor like ether or halothane is obtained from the machine and is made
   to flow through the breathing circuit to the patient.
 — Anesthesia machine is composed of two subsystems:
     (i) The gas supply-delivery unit, which consists of tubing and flow meters
           interconnected in parallel; and
    (ii) The anesthetic vaporizers, which is used to produce an anesthetic vapour
           from a volatile liquid.

Maintenance of General Anesthesia

The anesthesia provider attempts to maintain the lightest level of anesthesia in the brain
compatible with operating conditions. The following are five objectives of general
anesthesia:

1. Oxygenation: Tissues, especially the brain, must be continuously perfused with
oxygenated blood. The color of the blood, amount and kind of bleeding, and pulse
oximetry are indicators of the adequacy of oxygenation. Controls on the anesthesia
machine and monitors of vital functions keep the anesthesia provider aware of the
patient’s condition. 2. Unconsciousness: The patient remains asleep and unaware of the
environment during the surgical procedure. 3. Analgesia: The patient must be free of
pain during the surgical procedure. 4. Muscle relaxation: Muscle relaxation must be
constantly assessed to provide necessary amounts of drugs that cause skeletal muscles
to relax. Less tissue manipulation is required when muscles are relaxed. 5. Control of
autonomic reflexes: Anesthetic agents affect cardiovascular and respiratory systems.
Tissue manipulations and systemic reactions to them may be altered by drugs that control
the autonomic nervous system. Anesthesia Machine. General anesthesia is maintained
by inhalation of gases and IV injection of drugs. An anesthesia machine is always used
to deliver oxygen-anesthetic mixtures to the patient through a breathing system. The
anesthesia machine includes sources of oxygen and gases with flowmeters for measuring
and controlling their delivery; devices to volatilize and deliver liquid anesthetics; a gas-
driven mechanical ventilator; devices for monitoring the ECG, blood pressure, inspired
oxygen, and end-tidal carbon dioxide; and alarm systems to signal apnea or

                                          772
disconnection of the breathing circuit. Breathing tubes of corrugated rubber or plastic
carry gases from the machine to the facemask and breathing system. The reservoir
(breathing) bag compensates for variations in respiratory demand and permits assisted
or controlled ventilation by manual or mechanical compression of the bag. Sterile
disposable sets containing tubing, a mask, a Y-connector, and a reservoir bag are
commercially available in conductive and nonconductive materials.

  Learning outcome 3: Pack and sterilize Operation Theatre instruments

Definition of key terms

Aeration -Warm circulating air is used to remove ethylene oxide sterilant gas from
packages in a special chamber for a specified period of time.

Bowie-Dick test- Class 2 chemical indicator used in a prevacuum sterilizer to test the
efficacy of the air removal cycle.

Custom packs- Prepackaged collections of disposable supplies, drapes, sponges, and
containers prepared by the manufacturer or the distributor according to specific
instructions and requests by a particular service at a facility.

 Flash sterilization- A rapid method of steam sterilizing properly prepared instruments
for immediate use. These instruments are not wrapped. Flash sterilization is not the
preferred method of sterilization.

Gravity displacement sterilizer- A steam sterilizer that uses steam in a downward
motion to remove air from the sterilizing chamber. Air exits near front lower drain. Can
be high speed or pulsing.

Indicator- Devices inserted into a packed set and attached to the outside of the
wrapper/container used by health care personnel to monitor sterilization exposure
conditions. Integrator- A chemical device inserted into a packed set that changes in
response the time, temperature, and steam penetration to demonstrate visually that
parameters necessary for sterilization have been met.

Prevacuum sterilizer -A faster steam sterilizer that removes air by a vacuum before
filling the chamber with steam. Also known as dynamic air removal steam sterilization.
Process challenge pack




                                         773
Sterilization- Processes by which all pathogenic and nonpathogenic microorganisms,
including endospores, are killed. This term refers only to a validated process capable of
destroying all forms of microbial life, including endospores.

The sterilizer- is a piece of equipment used to attain either physical or chemical
sterilization. The agent used must be capable of killing all forms of microorganisms.
Strike-through Moisture or other substance penetrates through a sterile drape or wrapper
to an unsterile surface. Strike-through provides a pathway for capillary action.

Terminal cleaning- Thorough cleaning and disinfection of the perioperative
environment at the end of use.

Contents/methods/procedures/illustrations

Assembly of Instrument Sets

The weight of instruments and density of metal mass are distributed in the tray to allow
steam penetration for sterilizing and revaporization for drying. A large tray distributes
instruments so they make minimum contact with one another.

The size, design, and density of instruments are more important than their weight. The
conditions necessary for steam sterilization are difficult to achieve in exceedingly heavy
sets. Trays should not be overloaded. Closed container instrument sets should not weigh
more than 25 pounds. Consideration is given to the personnel who must lift and move
the packed sets when determining the presterilization weight. To assemble instrument
sets for sterilization, the following steps should be performed: 1. Make sure the
instruments are thoroughly dry. All instruments belonging to each set must have passed
through terminal cleaning and terminal sterilization before they are safe to handle. 2.
Unless contraindicated, place an absorbent towel or foam in the bottom of the tray to
absorb condensate, as for a rigid container with vacuum valves. Include a biologic
indicator or chemical integrator in the tray.

 3. Count instruments as they are placed in the tray, and record the number of each type.
A preprinted form is often used for this purpose. This form might be placed in the tray
before wrapping and sterilization so the circulating nurse and scrub person can verify
the baseline count. The form can be folded in half and placed in a paper peel pouch
without a plastic coating to prevent printer toner from transferring to the instruments
during processing. Concerns for toner particulate transfer to the instruments during the
cycle are under study. The best choice may be to affix the tray inventory count sheet to
the outside of the package. 4. Arrange the instruments in a definite pattern to protect
them from damage and to facilitate their removal for counting and use. Follow the
                                          774
instrument book or other listing of instruments to be included. 5. Place heavy inst 6.
Open the hinges and box locks on all hinged instruments. 7. Place ring-handled
instruments on stringers or holders designed for this purpose. The curved jaws of
hemostatic forceps and clamps should point in the same direction from smallest to
largest. Instruments should be grouped by style and classification (e.g., six straight
hemostats, six curved hemostats). Do not band with rubber bands. The metal under the
band will not sterilize adequately. 8. Place sharp and delicate instruments on top of other
instruments. They can be separated with an absorbent material or left in a sterilizing rack
with the blades and tips suspended. The blades of scissors, other cutting edges, and
delicate tips should not touch other instruments. If the instrument has a protective guard,
leave it on. Tip-protecting covers or instrument-protecting plastic sleeves should be
made of material that is steam-permeable and does not melt or deform with heat. 9. Place
concave or cupped instruments with the cupped surfaces down so that water condensate
does not collect in them during steam sterilization and drying.

 10. Disassemble all detachable parts. Some parts, such as screws and springs, can be
put in a peel pouch that is left open. Sealed pouches may not process correctly during
the sterilization process.

 11. Separate dissimilar metals. For example, brass knife handles and malleable
retractors should be separated from stainless steel instruments. Preferably, put each
metal in a separate tray, or separate metals with absorbent material.

 12. Place instruments with a lumen, such as a suction tip, in as near a horizontal position
as possible. These instruments should be tilted as little as possible to prevent trapped air
or the pooling of water condensate.

 13. Distribute weight as evenly as possible in the tray. Some trays have dividers, clips,
and pins that attach to the bottom, which help prevent instruments from shifting and keep
them in alignment.

14. Wrap the tray, or place it in a rigid container. Check woven textile wrappers for
holes or abrasion. Sequentially double wrap in a woven or nonwoven material, or use a
double thickness wrap in a single-fold configuration.

 15. Place a chemical indicator tab or tape on the outside wrapper or container for proof
that the package has been through the parameters necessary for sterilization.

 16. Label the sets appropriately with their intended use (e.g., basic set), the date
sterilized, and the process lot control number.

                                          775
Packaging Instruments and Other Items for Sterilization To be effective, the sterilizing
agent must come into direct contact with all surfaces of every instrument. Therefore
instruments must be packaged (individually or in sets) in such a way to allow adequate
exposure to the sterilant, prevent air from being trapped and moisture from being
retained during the sterilization process, and ensure sterile transfer to the sterile field.4
The majority of surgical instruments are made of stainless steel and can be sterilized by
steam under pressure. Effective steam sterilization involves the direct contact of all
surfaces with steam and the revaporization of water condensate to produce a dry, sterile
instrument.

Instrument Packaging For sterilizing and transporting, instruments are put in a closed
container or wrapped individually. Instruments placed in open trays are wrapped as sets.
Instruments may be sterilized unwrapped in a high-speed steam sterilizer immediately
before use (not recommended), may be prepared in advance as for a case cart, or may be
retained in sterile core storage until needed.4 Packaging Considerations The packaging
materials for all methods of sterilization should do the following:4

• Permit penetration of the sterilizing agent to achieve sterilization of all items in the
package.

 • Allow the release of the sterilizing agent at the end of the exposure period and allow
adequate drying or aerating.

• Withstand the physical conditions of the sterilizing process.

 • Maintain integrity of the package at varying atmospheric and humidity levels. In dry
climates or at high altitudes, some packaging materials are susceptible to rupture during
sterilization or dry out and crack in storage.

 • Provide an impermeable barrier to microorganisms, dust particles, and moisture after
sterilization. Items must remain sterile from the time they are removed from the sterilizer
until they are used.

 • Cover items completely and easily and fasten securely with adhesive strip or a heat
seal that cannot be resealed after opening. Seal integrity should be tamperproof. A
margin of at least 1 inch (2.5 cm) is considered a standard for safety on all sealed
packages. Scissors should not be used to cut off the end of a package. Contents cannot
be drawn out over this cut end because the contents would be contaminated by the edge
of the packaging material. For the same reason, packages are never torn open below a
seal.

                                           776
• Resist tears and punctures in handling. If accidental tears and holes do occur, they
must be visible.

 • Identification of the contents and the chemical indicator evidence of exposure to a
sterilizing agent should be placed on a label that is visible on the outside of the package.

• Be free of toxic ingredients and nonfast dyes.

• Be lint-free or low-linting.

• Protect the contents from physical damage.

 • Permit easy removal of the contents with transfer to the sterile field without
contamination or delamination (separation into layers). • Be economical. Packages
should be wrapped far enough away from sterile storage areas so that mixing sterile and
nonsterile packages is not possible. Cabinets that contain nonsterile items should be
labeled conspicuously. A procedure for sending items to and receiving items from the
sterilizer should be set up so that sterile and nonsterile packages can never be confused
en route. This procedure must be understood by everyone. Packages may be wrapped
with nonwoven or woven materials sequentially in two layers. Double-thickness
wrapping in one layer without using the sequential method is also acceptable. The
wrappers can be stitched around the edges or bonded/fused together. Aseptic
presentation to the sterile field is the prime consideration. Each facility should determine
which method and material is best suited to the clinical environment.

Handling Powered Instruments Before any new or repaired powered instrument is put
into use, the biomedical technician should verify that the instrument is functioning
according to the manufacturer’s specifications. Powered instruments are not without
some inherent dangers. Key points in handling powered instruments include the
following:

 1. Set the instrument and attachments alone on a small sterile table with the safety
switch on when they are not in use. This provides added protection from inadvertent
activation.

 2. Handle and store the air hose or electrical power cord with care. A broken air hose
can whip out of control. A broken electrical cord can short-circuit the instrument. Always
inspect the hose and cord for cracks and breaks.




                                          777
 3. To prevent inadvertent activation, assemble the appropriate handpiece, attachments
(e.g., blades, drills, reamers), and power source with the safety mechanism in position.
Always be certain that attachments are completely seated and locked in the handpiece.

 4. Test whether the instrument is in working condition before the surgeon is ready to
use it and before it is applied to the patient. To prevent inadvertent activation, the safety
mechanism must be set in position until ready to use and when changing attachments.
Cleaning and Sterilizing Powered Instruments Powered instruments should always be
operated, cleaned, and sterilized according to the manufacturer’s directions for use
andcare. Each instrument has different cleaning, lubricating, packaging, and sterilizing
requirements because of its various component parts. The bioburden is determined by
the size, design, complexity, and condition of the instrument; the degree of
contamination during use; and subsequent decontaminating and cleaning procedures.
Microorganisms can become entrapped around the seals on rotating shafts. For
instruments with a specific biologic challenge, manufacturers test in the area most
difficult to sterilize and recommend sterilization cycles accordingly. The following
general guidelines apply to the care of all powered instruments:

 1. Clean and decontaminate the instrument immediately after use to maintain optimal
function. a. During the surgical procedure, the scrub person should wipe off any organic
debris between uses. b. The accessories are disassembled for cleaning. Do not process
the powered instrument with a bit, burr, or blade in place. The metal against metal
prevents sterilization of the unit. If the blade, burr, or bit needs to be changed during the
procedure the exposed unsterile surfaces will contaminate the field. c. The air hose
should remain attached to the handpiece during cleaning. The air hose and electrical cord
should be wiped with detergent, damp cloth, and dry towel. d. The motor is not
immersed in liquid. The power mechanism cannot be cleaned in a basin of solution or
put in a washer-sterilizer, a washer-decontaminator, or an ultrasonic cleaner. The surface
of the instrument is wiped with a mild detergent, and caution is used to prevent solution
from entering the internal mechanism. The detergent is wiped off with a damp cloth, and
the mechanism is dried with a lint-free towel.

 2. Lubricate the instrument as recommended by the manufacturer. Handling
Instruments Surgical instruments are expensive and represent a major investment.
Surgical procedures have become more complicated and intricate, and as a result,
instruments have become more complex, more precise in design, and more delicate in
structure. Abuse, misuse, inadequate cleaning or processing, or rough handling can
damage and reduce the life expectancy of even the most durable instrument, and the cost
of repair or replacement becomes unnecessarily high. Instruments do deteriorate from
normal use, but with proper care an instrument should have a life of 10 years or more.2,5

                                           778
Setting Up the Instrument Table Standardized basic sets of sterile instruments are
selected for each specific surgical procedure. A set is a group of instruments that may
include all appropriate classifications of instruments or the instruments needed for a
specific part of the procedure (e.g., a gallbladder set). The surgeon may prefer some
specific instruments that are wrapped separately or added to the instrument set.
Instruments are usually prepared, wrapped, and sterilized several hours or days before
the surgical procedure so they are dry and cool for safe handling.1 Instruments are
sometimes steam sterilized immediately before use if there is no other alternative, but
this method is not recommended as a routine practice.3 Key elements of decontamination
and processing might be skipped, leaving the instruments unready for sterilization. The
scrub person counts all instruments, sponges, and sharps with the circulating nurse.
Some sets will have printed count sheets enclosed. Observe for incidental transfer of
toner from the count sheet to the instruments during steam sterilization. Instruments with
fused-on toner should not be used in patient care. Essential points in handling
instruments before the surgical procedure include:

 1. Handle loose instruments separately to prevent interlocking or crushing. a.
Instruments are never piled one on top of another on an instrument table; they are laid
side by side on a rolled sterile towel. Close the box locks on the instrument to avoid
entanglement when placed on the Mayo stand. b. Microsurgical, ophthalmic, and other
delicate instruments are vulnerable to damage through rough handling. Tip protectors
are removed and discarded during setup. c. Metal-to-metal contact should be avoided or
minimized. Scalpel blades should not be set in a metal basin. The edges can become dull,
and small chips of metal can become dislodged and inadvertently transferred to the
patient during irrigation.

 2. Inspect instruments such as scissors and forceps for alignment, imperfections,
cleanliness, and working condition. Unclean instruments render the entire set
contaminated.1,4 Remove any malfunctioning instrument from the set. It should be
labeled and sent for repair. Replace it in the set with a correctly functioning instrument
before processing. If the procedure is in process, the circulating nurse can obtain a sterile
replacement and remove the broken instrument from the room. Be sure to reconcile the
count sheet. a. Scalpel blades should be properly set in handles using a heavy instrument,
not fingers. b. Teeth and serrations should align exactly. c. Tips should be straight and
in alignment. d. Scissors should be snug and sharp in action. e. Cannulae should be
clear and without obstruction. Stylets should be removed.

3. Sort instruments neatly by classifications.

 4. Keep ring-handled instruments together with the curvatures and angles pointed in the
same direction positioned smallest to largest. Do not permit the instruments to become
                                           779
tangled on the towel roll. a. Hang ring handles over a rolled towel or over the edge of
the instrument tray or container within the sterile field. b. Remove instrument stringers
or holders if used to keep box locks open during processing. c. Close box locks on the
first ratchet as the setup progresses.

 5. Leave retractors and other heavy instruments in a tray or container, or lay them out
on a flat surface of the table. Do not permit any instrument to hang over the edge of the
sterile field.

 6. Protect sharp blades, edges, and tips. They should not touch anything. Take care not
to perforate the sterile table cover. a. Sets of instruments, such as osteotomes or
microsurgical instruments, may be in sterilization racks so that the blades and tips are
suspended. These instruments can remain in racks during the initial table setup and until
they are needed during the surgical procedure. b. Tip-protecting covers or instrument-
protecting plastic sleeves should be removed and discarded before the instruments are
used on the patient. Most covers and sleeves are not radiopaque and could become a
retained foreign body. c. If they are not in a rack, handles should be supported on a
rolled towel or gauze sponge. This keeps the blades and tips of microinstruments
suspended in midair for easy visualization. Handling Instruments During the Surgical
Procedure Efficient instrument handling throughout the surgical procedure is the
hallmark of an efficient scrub person.6 Key points in handling instruments during the
surgical procedure include the following:

1. Know the name and appropriate use of each instrument. Using fine instruments for
heavy tissue damages the instrument.

 2. Handle instruments individually. Tangled instruments are hard to separate in an
emergency.6 Instruments on the Mayo stand should be closed to minimize fumbling for
the correct item. a. If several instruments of the same type will be needed in rapid
succession (e.g., hemostats to clamp subcutaneous vessels), three or four may be picked
up at one time, but they are closed and passed individually to the surgeon and/or first
assistant. b. Instruments with sharp edges and fine tips are more susceptible to damage
than are standard instruments. The edges are easily dulled, and the tips are easily bent or
broken. Extreme caution is necessary to prevent catching the tips of microinstruments
on any object that could bend them.

 3. Hand the surgeon or assistant the correct instrument for each particular task.
Remember the following principle: Use for the intended purpose only. a. Avoid placing
fingers in the instrument rings as the instrument is passed. The instrument may
inadvertently drop or snag on drapes, causing an untoward injury to the patient or a team
member. The instrument may fall to the floor, thus becoming damaged and
                                          780
contaminated. b. Many surgeons use hand signals to indicate the type of instrument
needed. An understanding of what is taking place at the surgical site makes these signals
meaningful. c. Select instruments appropriate to the location of the surgical site; short
instruments are used for superficial work, and long ones are used for work deep in a
body cavity. Experience will facilitate instrument selection according to the surgeon’s
preference and need. d. Many instruments are used in pairs or in sequence.6 When the
surgeon clamps and/or cuts tissue, he or she will usually request suture. To use suture,
the surgeon will need to grasp the tissue with a pick-up for stabilization. After using
suture, the surgeon or assistant will need scissors to cut or a hemostat to hold the end of
the strand as a tag. e. Hand instruments around the incisional area, not directly over it,
to prevent possible injury. f. Knowledge of anatomy is useful for determining which
instrument is needed.

 4. Pass instruments decisively and firmly. When the surgeon extends his or her hand,
the instrument should be slapped or placed firmly into his or her palm in the proper
position for use. In general, when passing a curved instrument, the curve of the
instrument aligns with the direction of the curve of the

surgeon’s hand. The following points should be remembered when passing an instrument
to the surgeon: a. If the surgeon is on the opposite side of the operating bed, pass across
right hand to right hand (or with the left hand to a left-handed surgeon). The curve of the
instrument should match the curve of the surgeon’s hand. b. If the surgeon or assistant
is on the same side of the operating bed and to the right, pass with your left hand; if the
surgeon or assistant is to your left, pass with your right hand. c. Ring-handled
instruments are held near the box lock by the scrub person and passed by rotating the
wrist clockwise to place the handle directly into the surgeon’s waiting hand (Fig. 19-46).
d. Clip appliers are held between the fingers by the hinged joint during loading and
passing. Placing fingers in the rings may cause the clip to be discharged unintentionally.
The loaded applier is passed so the rings automatically pass over the surgeon’s finger in
a position of function for rapid use. e. Sharp and delicate instruments may be placed on
a flat surface for the surgeon to pick up (e.g., “no touch zone”).6 This technique avoids
potential contact with items such as cutting blades, sharp points, and needles in hand-to-
hand transfer. Always protect the hands when manipulating sharp instruments. Some
surgeons prefer to have all instruments passed directly so great care is taken to place the
instrument in the waiting hand without causing the surgeon to look up away from the
field. This is common in microsurgery.

 5. Watch the sterile field for loose instruments. After use, wipe the blood from the
surface and place them promptly on the Mayo stand or instrument table in a position of
function.1 The weight of instruments can injure the patient or cause postoperative

                                          781
discomfort. Keeping instruments off the field also decreases the possibility of their
falling to the floor.

 6. With a moist sponge, wipe blood and organic debris from instruments promptly after
each use. This is referred to as point of use cleaning.1 a. Demineralized, sterile distilled
water should be used to wipe instruments. Saline, blood, and other solutions can damage
surfaces, causing corrosion and, ultimately, pitting. b. Blood and debris that are allowed
to dry on surfaces, in box locks, and in crevices increase the bioburden that could be
carried into the surgical site. Dried material is harder to remove during processing.4 c.
A nonfibrous sponge should be used to wipe off microsurgical, ophthalmic, and other
delicate tips. This type of sponge prevents the snagging and breaking of delicate tips,
and the

• FIG. 19-46 Passing an instrument. Tip is visible; hand is free. Handle is placed directly
into waiting hand. Avoid potential for lint is decreased. Commercial microsurgical
instrument wipes are available.

 7. Flush the suction tip and tubing with sterile distilled water periodically to keep the
lumens patent.1 Use only a few milliliters of solution if using irrigating fluids from the
surgical field. Keep a tally of the amount used to clear the suction line, and deduct this
amount from the total used to irrigate the surgical site. Accurate accounting of the
solutions used for patient irrigation is necessary when determining the amount of blood
lost during the surgical procedure.

 8. Remove debris from electrosurgical (ESU) tips to ensure electrical contact.
Disposable abrasive tip cleaners are helpful for maintaining the conductivity and
effectiveness of the surface of the tip. Do not use a tip cleaner on Teflon-coated ESU
tips. Avoid using a scalpel blade to clean electrosurgical tips, because the debris may
become airborne and contaminate the surgical field.

 9. Place used instruments that will not be needed again (except sharp, cutting, delicate,
or powered instruments) into a tray or basin during or at the end of the surgical
procedure. a. Blood and gross debris are removed at the point of use before actual
cleaning and decontamination in the processing area.1 b. Carelessly dropping, tossing,
or throwing instruments into a basin causes damage. c. Instruments that have been wiped
can be immersed in a basin of sterile demineralized distilled water, not saline solution.
The sodium chloride in saline solution and in blood is corrosive and can damage
instrument surfaces. Bloody instruments should not soak in a basin of solution for a
prolonged period. d. Heavy instruments such as retractors should not be placed on top
of tissue and hemostatic forceps and other clamps. Place them in a separate tray. e.
Reusable sharps should be kept separate from other instruments of the same or similar
                                          782
size to prevent injury to instrument processing personnel. f. Keep instruments accessible
for final counts.

Dismantling the Instrument Table

The scrub person breaks down the instrument table at the end of the surgical procedure
while wearing the gown and full PPE. This process may be delayed and the scrub person
and instrument table maintained as sterile for a short time if the patient is in critical
condition. The breakdown should not be started until a critical patient is out of the OR
and admitted to PACU. Some examples of when to wait before breakdown include
cardiac, vascular, some neuro, multiple trauma, or other procedure or patient condition
that could precipitate expedient return to OR for immediate surgical reopening. When
the scrub person is assured that the patient will not return to the OR, the table breakdown
can begin. Whether used or unused, all instruments on the instrument table are
considered contaminated and must be promptly and properly decontaminated/cleaned,
inspected, terminally sterilized, and prepared for subsequent use. Wearing gloves, a
gown, a mask, and protective eyewear, the scrub person prepares instruments for the
cleaning process. Instruments are cleaned in a designated instrument processing area,
not in the OR. Key points in handling instruments when dismantling the instrument table
include the following:

 Check drapes, towels, and table covers to be sure that instruments do not go to the
laundry or into the trash. A final quick count is a safeguard. 2. Collect instruments from
the Mayo stand and any other small tables, and collect those that may have been dropped
or passed off the sterile field. 3. Separate delicate, small instruments and those with
sharp or semisharp edges for special handling. 4. Disassemble all instruments with
removable parts to expose all surfaces for cleaning. 5. Open all hinged instruments to
expose box locks and serrations. 6. Separate instruments of dissimilar metals.
Instruments of each type of metal should be cleaned separately to prevent electrolytic
deposition of other metals. 7. Flush cold, distilled water through hollow instruments or
channels, such as suction tips or endoscopes, to prevent organic debris from drying. 8.
Rinse off blood and debris with demineralized distilled water or an enzymatic detergent
solution. 9. Follow the procedures for preparing each instrument for decontamination
or terminal sterilization. Procedures vary depending on the type of instrument and its
components and on the equipment available and its location. a. Some air-powered
instruments can be lubricated with a sterile lubricant after sterilization and just before
use. b. Some manufacturers supply lubricant (usually a silicone based oil). c. Some
instruments must be run after lubrication to disperse the lubricant through the
mechanism.


                                          783
     10. Wrap the instrument for sterilization. a. Most manufacturers supply sterilizing cases
    for powered equipment. These cases can be wrapped in woven or nonwoven material. b.
    The instrument must be disassembled. c. The sharp edges of accessories must be
    protected. d. Hoses or cords should be loosely coiled.

       Packing techniques
        Packaging of Sterile Products

    Contents

    •      Why packing of sterile goods?

    •      Packaging concept for sterile products

    •      Primary packaging containing the product

    •      Secondary packaging

    •      Transport packaging

    •      Validation of the packaging system

    •      Requirements for the primary packaging

    •      General guidelines for packaging practice

    •      Packaging materials

    •      Soft/flexible packaging materials

    •      Textile sheets: cotton or linen

    •      Paper sheets

    •      Paper sterilization bags

    •      Non-woven sheets

    •      Laminated film pouches

    •      Rigid packaging systems

    •      Sterilizing drums
                                                784
•       Sterilizing containers

•       Wrapping techniques for packaging using sheets

•       Accessories for packaging

•       Indicator tape

•       Trays and baskets

•       Protection materials

•       Dust covers

•       Workstation for packaging

•   Choice of materials and methods for packaging of sterile supplies (primary
packaging)

•       Textile packs

•       Small quantities of textile and/or bandages/swabs

•       Instrument sets in trays/baskets

•       Individual instruments:

•       Bowls and trays (small)

    Bowls and trays (large)

    Catheters, tubing, hoses

    Scopes

    Fine surgical instruments (individual as well
    as in sets)

    Mammal prosthesis

    Normative references (European)



                                            785
Why packing of sterile goods?
                                At the end of a correct sterilization process, products
                                inside the sterilizer chamber are sterile. The air in the
                                room where the sterilizer is installed contains dust
                                particles, which may carry micro-organisms. So when
                                taking out the load from the sterilizer, it soon will be
                                contaminated again. In addition usually sterile goods
                                are stored for quite some time before they are used, and
                                moreover they are transported through the hospital to
                                the place they are to be used. It thus is obvious, that,
                                when not protected, the goods will definitely be
                                recontaminated by the time they are used.

 Packaging is essential for     The goods must be put in a packaging to prevent
 maintaining sterility!         recontamination after sterilization. At the same time the
                                packaging should be suitable for sterilizing the goods it
                                contains!


                                          786
                              Moreover the packaging protects is content against
                              damage during handling and transport.




Packaging concept for sterile products

Depending on use, storage and transportation, a sterile product should be packaged in
one or more packaging layers:
                              Primary packaging containing the product

                              The primary packaging prevents recontamination of the
                              product after sterilization. It should provide an effective
                              microbial barrier and it should allow passage of air and
                              the sterilizing agent, e.g. steam. A primary packaging is
                              sufficient in situations that there is no chance that dust
                              is deposited on the pack. In a dust free storage or in case
                              of immediate use of the materials. The primary
 An instrument set in its
                              packaging maintains sterility during storage and
 primary packaging
                              transport. Examples of primary packaging: 2 layers of
                              paper, 2 layers of non-woven sheets, single or double
                              laminated film pouch, paper bag or container with
                              adequate filter(s).
                              Secondary packaging

                              This second layer used to facilitate proper storage and
                              internal transport to user. It may contain one or more
                              primary packages. E.g. an extra, plastic wrapper, bag,
                              cardboard box or container. It may offer extra
 Disposable sterile items     protection against dust and gives extra mechanical
 in secondary packaging       protection, making handling easier. Commonly used for
                              disposable sterile supplies.




                                         787
                                Transport packaging

                                A transport package is used for external transporting of
                                sterile goods in their primary and secondary packaging.
                                Usually it is a strong cardboard box, cradle, closed
                                trolley or other type of container.

 Closed      trolleys    for    When the goods enter the clean area, e.g. operating
 external transport             theatre, the transport packaging should be removed.


Validation of the packaging system

                                It is essential that a packaging system with its content
                                meet the requirements in terms of sterility maintenance
                                and protection of its contents. That is why any
                                packaging should be validated in combination with the
                                actual load and the sterilization process used. When
                                testing a packaging system, also handling transport and
 Any combination of load,       storage conditions should be considered! (see EN 868-
 packaging            and       1)
 sterilization     process
 should be validated.




Requirements for the primary packaging

When observing a packaging from the moment it is put around a product before
sterilization until the moment it is opened, just before use of its content, the requirements
become clear:

Enabling sterilization. The packaging should allow air that is in the pack to be driven
out and the sterilizing agent to reach all surfaces of its content.

Compatible with the sterilization process. The packaging should be able to withstand
the conditions during the sterilization process such as pressure changes, high temperature
and humidity

Maintaining Sterility. After taking the product out of the sterilizer it should remain
sterile during handling, transport and storage until use.

                                           788
Strong. It should be remain intact after any intended handling and shipping

Ensure product integrity and patient safety. It should not release any chemicals or
particles or affect the product in any other way, which may affect the quality of the
product or which might endanger the patient on which the product will be used.

Indicator. The packaging should bear a clearly visible marking indicating whether or
not the product is sterilized.

Facilitate aseptic opening and presentation. When opening a packed sterile product,
the chance for recontamination of the product should be kept as low as possible. When
taking the product from the packaging, recontamination should be prevented. In other
words: the packaging should facilitate aseptic opening and presentation. This implies:

simple opening

when taking out sterile objects form the packaging, it should not be possible to touch the
unsterile outer side of the packaging.

Visible that it was opened. Opening should result in a clearly visible indication that the
pack was opened.

General guidelines for packaging practice

If in a health facility more than one sterilization methods are used, the accidental
exchange of packaging materials shall be prevented. The packaging should have an
indication showing clearly for which sterilization method it should be used.

Reusable medical supplies that are to be re-sterilized (e.g. due to passing of the expiry
date of a pack, or because of damaged packaging), should inspected, where necessary
cleaned and repacked. Textile should be reconditioned.

The content of a pack, which was opened by mistake, should be considered as non-
sterile. It should be made clearly visible that a package was opened. E.g. by clearly
damaging the packaging material. The content of such pack shall be inspected and when
necessary, cleaned. It then is repacked and sterilized.

Packaging materials

A wide range of materials used for packaging of sterile supplies are available.



                                          789
Traditionally, packaging materials for sterile supplies were reusable, such as sterilizing
drums and cotton ware. Due to their inadequate microbial barrier, most of these
traditional materials do not meet the requirements for primary sterile packaging
anymore. They may still play a role as mechanical protection or additional dust
protection layer. At the moment non-wovens, laminated film pouches, paper bags and
containers are used as primary packaging materials. The following is an overview of
packaging materials in use in sterile supply:
 Soft/flexible packaging materials
                                 Textile sheets: cotton or linen

                                 Use: Inner wrapping of instrument sets or outer dust
                                 protection

                                 Textile alone is not suitable as primary packaging!

                                 Cotton sheets have long been the standard packaging
                                 material for sterile goods. It has some major
                                 advantages

                                 Textile always has been a very common and well
                                 known hospital commodity

                                 Strong

                                 Well drapable and convenient in use

                                 Can be reused.

                                 The openings between the threads however are larger
 Packaging in cotton still       then most micro-organisms and thus the fabric does
 being used in health            not provide an adequate microbial barrier. It therefore
 facilities with limited         does not meet the requirements anymore as primary
 resources                       packaging for sterile goods. They however are still
                                 often used as an inner wrapping for protection or as an
                                 outer dust cover.

                                 Whenever textile is used, it should contain its natural
                                 humidity. (It should be conditioned). If textile is too
                                 dry it may cause overheating of the steam and thus
                                 cause          a         failing          sterilization.


                                          790
                            Paper sheets

                            Use: Primary packaging for wrapping of textile packs
                            and instrument sets in trays. Also used as inner
                            packaging in containers

                            Paper was the first alternative that replaced textile. It
                            has a smaller pore size then textile. And thus can be
                            used as primary packaging. Smooth papers are used
                            for inner packaging, whereas crepe paper is stronger
                            and is rough. Crepe paper can be used for inner and
                            outer packaging.

                            During sterilization, steam penetrates through the
                            packaging. When paper is wet, it looses much of its
Paper sheets available in   original strength. Therefore stress in paper should be
many sizes and strengths    prevented. Wrapping should not be too tight, but also
                            not too loose. It is essential that drying is adequate.

                            Paper    sheets     are    for    single    use    only.


                            Paper sterilization bags

                            Use: For packaging of individual instruments or small
                            sets used in nursing stations and wards.

                            Closing is usually done in a sealing device.

                            Disadvantages:

                            They are not very strong

                            Opening is not convenient: tearing or cutting

Paper sterilization bags    They do not facilitate aseptic opening.

                            You cannot see what is inside

                            Aseptic presentation can be improved by putting
                            instruments in the bag with the handle at the opening
                            end. It is not convenient to take out instruments from

                                     791
                           the bag. Its use has decreased with the introduction of
                           laminated film pouches.

                           Paper sterilization bags are for single use only


                           Non-woven sheets

                           Use: Primary packaging for wrapping of textile packs
                           and instrument sets in trays. Also used as inner
                           packaging in containers

                           Non-wovens contain a certain amount of synthetic
                           fibers. Added may be inorganic, textile, cellulose or
                           other kind of synthetic fibers. These fibers of different
Non-woven      wrapper     materials are joined together, by for example pressing
                           and heating. This means that the fibers are not woven
                           together, but sealed together. For sterilization special
                           non-wovens have been developed to meet the
                           requirements for the primary packaging of sterile
                           goods. They combine the good characteristics of other
Non-wovens are water-
                           packaging materials:
repellent
                           Very strong

                           Well drapable

                           Allow air removal and penetration of the sterilizing
                           agent

                           Very small pores, thus efficient microbial barrier

Packaging an instrument    Virtually lint-free; free of particles and loose fibers
set in a non-woven sheet
using the parcel fold      They repel liquids (hydrophobic) Fluids are not
                           absorbed into the fabric.

                           Various non-woven materials are available for a range
                           of applications in the sterilization department: extra
                           softness, extra strong, etc.



                                    792
                             Non-woven       sheets    are     for     single-use   only


                             Laminated film pouches

                             Use: Primary packaging for individual instruments or
                             small instrument sets.

                             They were the follow up of paper sterilization bags.
                             The pouches consist of a sheet of paper or non-woven
                             and a sheet of laminated transparent plastic, which are
                             sealed together. The film cannot be penetrated by
Typical   laminated   film   steam or air. Removal of air and penetration of steam
pouch                        is through the paper/non-woven. The pouch is opened
                             by peeling back the laminated sheet from the paper
                             sheets, like opening a banana.

                             Pouches are available in many sizes. The open end of
                             the pouch is closed with a sealing device. It is essential
                             that the sealing temperature and pressure are adjusted
                             well in order to get an adequate seal.

                             Also laminated film packaging is available on roll. The
                             user can cut pouches to any size needed. In that case
                             both sides need to be sealed by the user.
Laminated film pouches in
                             Remarks
various sizes and on roll
                             The peel-open system assures dust-free aseptic
                             opening an presentation.

                             The pouch should be such that when peeling it open,
                             not the paper nor the laminate will tear. It should open
                             neatly along the seals.

                             It should not release fibers or fluffs.
Sealing device for pouches
                             The content is clearly visible.

                             It should not possible to reseal the pouch, when
                             opening by mistake.

                                      793
                             A sterilizer indicator should be on the pouch indicating
                             whether a product was processed.

                             The content should not be tightly surrounded by the
                             packaging material; it should be able to move freely
                             inside the pouch.

                             Sterilization pouches should be put upright in a grid
                             basket or container and not too tight together, such that
                             a hand can slide in between them.

                             Laminated film pouches are for single use only.

                             When packaging in dual laminated pouches, make
                             sure that the paper of both packages are on the same
                             side. The inner pouch should fit freely in the outer
                             pouch!
Rigid packaging systems
                             Sterilizing drums

                             Use: As secondary packaging layer: mechanical
                             protection of its content

                             Not suitable as primary packaging.

                             In the past, most sterilizers had vertical, round
                             chambers. For various chamber sizes, drums were
                             available. To allow steam into the drum, the wall is
                             perforated. A metal band around the drum can be
                             shifted in order to open and close the perforations.
                             Before sterilization they are opened. After sterilization
                             the perforations are closed again. They are known as
Sterilizing drums are only   Schimmelbush drums and were widespread.
suitable as additional
                             Problems:
mechanical      protection
(secondary packaging)
                             The band is closed after sterilization and thus the
                             content may be recontaminated immediately after
                             sterilization.

                                      794
                            The band does not provide an adequate closure, thus
                            contaminated air may be sucked inside the drum. Also
                            the lid closure does not provide a proper seal.

                            Most modern autoclaves have horizontal, rectangular
                            chambers. Round drums are then very inefficient in
                            using the sterilizer space.

                            The drums have hinged lids, hindering aseptic
                            opening.

                            Therefore they are not suitable as primary packaging.
                            They may only be used as an extra mechanical
                            protection.

                            Drums with filters in top and bottom

                            Drums are available with filters in the lid and bottom.
                            They can be considered as sterilizing containers for
                            round,              vertical                 autoclaves.



                            Sterilizing containers

                            Use: Primary packaging of textile packs and
                            instrument sets in trays.

                            Well designed sterilizing containers offer the
                            following features:

Loading a sterilizer with   Air removal and steam access through filters or valves.
containers                  They ensure maintenance of sterility during storage.

                            For autoclaves with downward displacement
                            processes containers are available with filters in the lid
                            and bottom.

                            The sizing of most container systems is based on the
                            Sterilizing Unit (1 StU =30cmx30cmx60cm). Thus
Sterilizing    container    they fit in sterilizers, instrument washer disinfectors,

                                     795
                                 and are compatible with packaging materials, that are
                                 also based on this unit.

                                 The lid is removed completely from the bottom part
                                 thus facilitating aseptic opening

                                 They provide an effective mechanical protection
                                 during handling and transport

 Taking out a tray from          They can be stacked. However stacking should not
 container                       hinder steam penetration, nor cause entering of
                                 condensate dripping down from higher containers.
                                 Proper drying is to be confirmed.

                                 Grid baskets can be stacked inside containers.

                                 Labeling system offers clear identification of the
                                 content, production data etc.

                                 A tamper protection device shall give clear indication
                                 whether a container was opened

                                 Depending on the sterilizer process, containers shall
                                 be used with filters in top and bottom (for downward
                                 displacement process) or containers with filters only
                                 in the top (fractionated prevacuum process).



Wrapping techniques for packaging using sheets

When opening a pack containing sterile materials, it is essential that, due to the act of
opening, the content is not contaminated. Wrapping techniques for packs and sets have
been developed which assures this aseptic opening. The most common wrapping
techniques that are applied for packaging of textile packs and instrument sets are the
envelope fold and the parcel fold. The unfolded wrapper covers the instrument table and
thus provides a sterile field. The techniques can be used for sheets of textile, paper and
non-wovens.



11. Sterilize the instrument in steam unless contraindicated by the manufacturer.

                                          796
Types of Sterilization methods

Dry Heat Sterilization

Dry heat in the form of hot air is used primarily to sterilize anhydrous oils, petroleum
products, and talc, which steam and ethylene oxide gas cannot penetrate. The destruction
of microbial life by dry heat is a physical oxidation or slow burning process that involves
coagulating the protein in cells. Higher temperatures are required in the absence of
moisture because the microorganisms are destroyed through a very slow process of heat
absorption by conduction. Dry heat sterilizers are not commonly found in the OR
processing areas. Dry heat is commonly used in dental suites. Advantages of Dry Heat
Sterilization

 Hot air penetrates certain substances that cannot be sterilized by steam sterilization or
another method.

Dry heat is a protective method of sterilizing some delicate, sharp, or cutting-edge
instruments. Steam may erode or corrode cutting edges. Disadvantages of Dry Heat
Sterilization

A long exposure period is required, because hot air penetrates slowly and possibly
unevenly.

The time and temperature required will vary for different substances.

Overexposure may ruin some substances.

Types of Dry Heat Sterilizers

Mechanical Convection Oven. The most efficient and reliable dry heat sterilizer is an
electrically heated, mechanical convection hot air oven. A blower forces hot air in
motion around items in the load to hasten the heating of substances and to ensure a
uniform temperature in all areas of the oven. Early models operated at 320° F to 340° F
(160° C-171° C) for 1 to 2 hours. Faster portable tabletop models are available; these
run at 375° F to 400° F (190.5° C-204° C), with total cycle times of 6 minutes for
unwrapped items and 12 minutes for wrapped ones. Optional cooling chambers are also
available. Gravity Convection Oven.

A conventional gravity displacement steam sterilizer chamber can be used for dry heat
sterilization. Heat is provided by steam in the jacket only; this heat may not be evenly
distributed throughout the chamber. The hot air rises initially and by gravity displaces
cooler air at the bottom of the chamber. The maximum temperature that can be obtained
                                          797
is 250° F (121° C) or 270° F (132° C) in a high-pressure gravity displacement sterilizer.
To ensure adequate heat conduction through all items, the exposure period is a minimum
of 6 hours and preferably overnight.

Loading the Sterilizer When loading a dry heat sterilizer, it is necessary to allow space
between the items and along the chamber walls so the hot air can circulate freely. The
chamber is never loaded to full capacity. Timing the Load. The time of exposure in a dry
heat sterilizer varies depending on the characteristics of individual items, the layer depth
in containers, and the temperature in the sterilizer. The timing of exposure begins when
the thermometer registers the desired temperature. Items are exposed for the following
minimum periods, assuming the amount in each container is kept to a minimum and the
sterilizer is loaded according to the manufacturer’s recommendations:

6 minutes at 400° F (204° C), unwrapped

12 minutes at 375° F (190.5° C), wrapped

1 hour at 340° F (171° C), wrapped or unwrapped

2 hours at 320° F (160° C), wrapped or unwrapped

3 hours at 285° F (140° C), wrapped or unwrapped

6 hours at 250° F (121° C), wrapped or unwrapped Biologic Testing of the Dry

Heat Sterilizer Biologic indicators with endospores of atrophaeus are used to monitor the
dry heat process. Commercially prepared endospore strips in glassine envelopes should
be used. Each load should be tested and the items quarantined until negative results are
confirmed.

Chemical Sterilization

The only chemicals used for sterilization are those that are registered as a sterilant by the
EPA. They may be approved for use in either a gaseous, plasma, or liquid state.

Ethylene Oxide Gas Sterilization Ethylene oxide (EO) gas is used to sterilize items that
are sensitive to heat or moisture. EO or EtO is a chemical alkylating agent that kills
microorganisms (including endospores) by interfering with the normal metabolism of
protein and reproductive processes, resulting in cell death. Used in the gaseous state, EO
must have direct contact with microorganisms on or in the items to be sterilized. EO is
the most regulated sterilization process in the United States. EO is highly flammable and
explosive in air and therefore must be used in an explosion-proof sterilizing chamber in

                                           798
a controlled environment. The machine is equipped with alarms and will automatically
lock if a malfunction occurs. When handled properly, EO is reliable and safe for
sterilization, but the toxic emissions and residues of EO present health hazards to
personnel and patients.

Advantages of EO Gas Sterilization

1. EO gas is an effective substitute agent to use with most items that cannot be sterilized
by heat, such as plastics with low melting points.

2. EO gas provides an effective method of sterilization for items that steam and moisture
may erode; it is noncorrosive and does not damage items.

 3. EO gas completely permeates all porous materials; it does not penetrate metal, glass,
and petroleum-based lubricants. EO gas sterilization is not recommended for oils,
liquids, and powder (including talc). Solutions in glass ampules can be sterilized in EO
because the gas does not penetrate glass. But a glass vial with a rubber stopper must not
be put in the sterilizer because the gas will penetrate the rubber and may react with the
drugs in solution, causing a potentially harmful chemical reaction.

 4. Automatic controls preclude human error by establishing proper levels of pressure,
temperature, humidity, and gas concentration. The sterilizer is operated according to the
manufacturer’s instructions.

5. EO gas leaves no film on items.

6. EO gas sterilization is used extensively in the preparation of commercially available,
packaged, presterilized items because packaging materials that prolong storage life can
be used.

Disadvantages of EO Gas Sterilization

1. EO gas sterilization is a complicated and long process that is carefully monitored.

2. EO sterilization takes longer than steam sterilization; it is a long, slow process.

3. EO gas requires special, expensive equipment. Gas is somewhat expensive per cycle.

 4. Items that absorb EO gas during sterilization, such as rubber, polyethylene, or
silicone, require an aeration period (Table 18-4). Air admitted to the sterilizer at the end
of the cycle only partially aerates the load.


                                          799
 5. Toxic byproducts can be formed in the presence of moisture droplets during the
exposure of some plastics, particularly polyvinyl chloride.

6. Repeated sterilization can increase the concentration of the total EO residues in
porous items. These increased levels can be hazardous unless the gas can be dissipated.

7. EO is a vesicant when in contact with skin and mucous membranes. a. Liquid EO
may cause serious burns if not removed immediately by thorough washing. b. Gloves
made of neoprene, polyvinyl fluoride, nitryl or butyl rubber, or other material known to
be impermeable to EO penetration should be worn for handling sterilized packages
before aeration. If thick cotton gloves are worn, they should be placed in the aerator
between uses. c. Personnel who wear contact lenses, especially soft lenses, should wear
protective goggles when working around EO sterilizers to avoid eye irritation.

 8. Inhaled EO gas can be irritating to mucous membranes. It is a colorless gas, but its
presence is easily detectable by odor. Overexposure causes nasal and throat irritation.
Prolonged exposure may result in nausea, vomiting, dizziness, difficulty breathing, and
peripheral paralysis. a. Immediately after the completion of each cycle, the sterilizer door
should be opened approximately 2 inches and the area cleared of all personnel for 15
minutes before unloading. b. Loading carts should be pulled, not pushed, from the
sterilizer to the aerator. Air currents flowing over the load may accumulate a residual
gas that could be inhaled.

 9. Long-term exposure to EO is known to be a potential occupational carcinogen,
causing leukemia. It is also a mutagen,

Causing spontaneous abortion, genetic defects, chromosomal damage, and neurologic
dysfunction. a. The standards of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration
(OSHA) limit an employee’s exposure to ethylene oxide to 1 part per million (ppm) of
air averaged over an 8-hour period to an active level of 0.5 ppm, and to a short-term limit
of 5 ppm averaged over a 15-minute period. These exposure limits are referred to as
permissible exposure limits (PELs). The short-term limit addresses exposure to bursts
of gas, such as when opening a sterilizer. Breathing zone sampling is performed daily
throughout an 8-hour shift on at least one employee for each job classification of exposed
personnel. Passive dosimeter badges are the most popular monitoring devices for
personnel. Chromatographs and other types of detectors are used for continuous gas
analysis of the environment. b. EO gas is vented from the sterilizer to the outside
atmosphere to avoid personnel exposure. Audible and visual alarm systems should be
installed to indicate a failure in the ventilation system. Most sterilizers have an exhaust
hood over the sterilizer door. c. The sterilizer door has locking and sealing mechanisms.
The integrity of the seals is checked regularly. Automatic controls must function
properly so the door cannot be opened until the gas is evacuated from the chamber. Types
                                          800
of EO Gas Sterilizers the capacity of EO chambers varies from approximately 2 ft (57.5
L)

 in a tabletop size of 12 × 12 × 24 inches (30 × 30 × 60 cm) to very large floor-loading
units that are 28 × 67 × 78 inches (72 × 180 × 198 cm). These chambers automatically
control gas concentration, temperature, humidity, and time. Most models have vacuum
pumps to evacuate air from the chamber and steam ejectors to humidify and increase
temperature. Microcomputer controls and digital printouts of cycle parameters provide
evidence of proper operation. A purge cycle follows the timed gas-exposure cycle to
vent the chamber of airborne residual gas.

Ozone Gas Sterilization

 Ozone sterilizes by oxidation, a process that destroys organic and inorganic matter. It
penetrates the membrane of cells, causing them to explode. Ozone has been used to
purify water since the early twentieth century. Ozone is a metastable gas that can be
generated easily from oxygen and water at the point of use. No special outlet or water
supply is required. No special cartridges or canisters of a chemical are needed. This is a
low-temperature method of sterilization that has been in use in industry for more than
100 years. Safety of ozone gas exposure is measured in PELs. OSHA has set limits as
0.1 ppm per 8-hour period. The PEL is not to exceed 0.3 ppm/15 minutes. Severe
pulmonary edema will result at levels of 0.3 ppm exposure for 30 minutes. Personnel
using ozone sterilization do not encounter the gas in its intact state. The gas is converted
back to water and oxygen at the end of the cycle before the unit can be opened. There is
only one setting for all cycles, so the risk for error in operating the machine is minimized.
The process takes approximately 1 hour. The FDA has cleared ozone sterilizers for use
on plastic, metal, and some rigid lumens. Cellulose packaging cannot be used.
Nonwoven pouches or vented closed container systems are used for instrumentation in
ozone sterilizers. Ozone sterilization technology was developed in Canada by TSO3 Inc.
and approved for sale in 2005.

The sterizone system, marketed by Skytron, operates just above room temperature at
87.4° F to 97° F (30.8° C-36° C) and is safe for heat-sensitive instrumentation. (More
information can be found at www.tso3.com.) The ozone sterilizer works in four phases
over a period of 4.5 hours:

 • Cold water vapor is humidified. About 75 mL per load. O2 is electrically charged to
create O3, which is ozone. Ozone has a bluish color.

 • The water vapor and O3 combine in the chamber. One oxygen atom is released from
the O3 molecule to combine with and deactivate microorganisms.

                                           801
 • The water vapor, ozone, and free oxygen molecule are vented into a catalytic converter
that separates out the water and oxygen (H2O and O2) for discharge into the drain and
room air. Advantages of Ozone Gas Sterilization

 • The sterilizer generates its own agent using hospital-grade oxygen, water, and the
electrical supply. It is simple and inexpensive to operate.

• Ozone gas sterilization provides an alternative to EO gas sterilization of many heat-
and moisture-sensitive items.

 • Ozone gas sterilization does not affect anodized aluminum, titanium, chromium,
silicone, neoprene, and Teflon.

 • Aeration is not necessary; ozone leaves no residue and converts to oxygen in a short
time.

• Low temperature is safer for heat-sensitive instrumentation. Disadvantages of Ozone



Chemical Sterilants in Solution Liquid

 Chemical agents registered as sterilants by the EPA provide an alternative method for
sterilizing minimally invasive heatsensitive items if a gas or plasma sterilizer is not
available or the aeration period makes EO gas sterilization impractical. Items processed
for patient care are categorized as critical, semicritical, and noncritical according to the
Spaulding classification system. Items that enter tissue or the vascular system are
considered critical and must be sterile. Items are sterilized with a liquid sterilant by
immersing them in solution for the required time specified by the manufacturer to be
sporicidal (i.e., to kill endospores). All chemical solutions have advantages and
disadvantages, and each sterilant has specific assets and limitations. (Additional
information is available at www.fda.gov.) Policies and procedures should be in place to
regulate and guide the use of chemical sterilants in solution. PPE should be worn and
eyewash stations should be conveniently located near the point of use. Advantages of
Chemical Sterilants

The solution has a low surface tension; it penetrates into crevices and is readily rinsed
from items.

It is noncorrosive, nonstaining, and safe for instruments that can be immersed in a
chemical solution.


                                          802
It does not damage lenses or cement on lensed endoscopes.

It is not absorbed by rubber or plastic.

It has low volatility and is stable for the time specified by the manufacturer.
Disadvantages of Chemical Sterilants

Prolonged exposure to a chemical sterilant may be necessary for sterilization.

Some chemical sterilants have hazardous effects associated with exposure.

Even if a chemical has low toxicity and irritation, items must be thoroughly rinsed in
sterile distilled water before use.

Failure to adequately rinse an endoscope can cause a chemically induced colitis.

Sterile transfer is difficult, because items are wet.

Chemically sterilized items cannot be held in long-term sterile storage. They must be
processed for immediate use.

The solution can become diluted during use if an item is wet when placed in it. Types of
Chemical Sterilants In addition to EPA registration, chemical sterilants are approved by
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) as a method of sterilization for critical
items that are heat sensitive and can be immersed. The manufacturer is responsible for
providing processing instructions on the container label, and the user is obligated to
follow the instructions. All solutions should be tested before use with an appropriate test
strip to validate the concentration of the sterilant. This is the only way to know if the
chemical will be effective.

Acetic Acid. Acetic acid mixed with peracetic acid and hydrogen peroxide kills
microorganisms by a process of oxidation to denature proteins in a process that takes 5
to 6 hours at a room temperature of 77° F (25° C). The solution is commonly used as a
sterilant for dialysis machines. It is biodegradable and leaves no residue.

Formaldehyde. A 37% aqueous solution (formalin) or 8% formaldehyde in 70%
isopropyl alcohol kills microorganisms by coagulating protein in the cells. The solution
is effective at room temperature. Formaldehyde has a pungent odor and is irritating to
the eyes and nasal passages. Its vapors can be toxic.

Glutaraldehyde. According to the FDA, a 2.4%, 2.5%, or 3.4% aqueous solution of
activated buffered alkaline glutaraldehyde kills microorganisms by the denaturation of

                                           803
protein in cells. The solution is activated by adding a powdered buffer to the liquid.
Alkaline glutaraldehyde solution changes pH and gradually loses its effectiveness after
the date of activation. The expiration date specified by the manufacturer is marked on
the container when activated (e.g., 14 or 28 days for aqueous Cidex–activated dialdehyde
solution)..

Peracetic Acid.

 A proprietary chemical formulation of 35% peracetic acid, hydrogen peroxide, and
water inactivates critical microbial cell systems. Peracetic acid is an acetic acid plus an
extra oxygen atom that reacts with most cellular components to cause cell death. The
mechanism may vary with each type of cell (e.g., vegetative bacterial endospores,
mycobacterium). The sterilant is supplied in unit doses for each cycle and is diluted
during the sterilization process to 0.2% peracetic acid solution. During the 23-minute
sterilization process, the solution is heated to 122° F to 131° F (50° C-55° C) as it passes
through the self-contained processing chamber. All items and internal components of the
STERIS 1E unit are submerged in the heated sterilant. On completion of the sterilizing
cycle, the sterilant is discharged into the sanitary drain. The used chemical is not
considered a hazardous material by the EPA. The instruments are automatically rinsed
in tap water that is passed through ultraviolet light, filtered through two external
prefilters and two 0.1-mm internal microfiltration systems. The smallest known
bacterium, Pseudomonas diminuta, is unable to pass through the pores in this filter
system. (This is the same method used by pharmaceutical manufacturers to make sterile
injectable medications.) The STERIS 1E unit uses a standard tap water supply, a sanitary
drain, and a 110-V electrical connection. This tabletop unit has a printout to document
each cycle. Periodic maintenance includes filter changes based on the chemical
components of the external water supply. Biologic monitoring according to the
manufacturer’s recommendation is performed daily with a commercially prepared
endospore strip containing G. stearothermophilus. Hypochlorous Acid. Hypochlorous
acid is derived from electrochemical activation of a brine solution. Although technically
a high-level disinfectant (HLD), it kills many endospores on wellcleaned endoscopes
and other heat-sensitive items. This technique was approved in late 2002 by the FDA.
Sterilox liquid chemical HLD system is nontoxic and environmentally safe. This
chemical is a nonaldehyde oxidation material that kills endospores. The 10-minute
process is a single-use design that requires a base unit with inflows of water and
electricity that connects to an endoscope processor. Salt tablets (400 grain) and a water
conditioner are added at the beginning of the cycle. No special handling or precautions
are required. Containers for Chemical Sterilant in Solution A large bin with a perforated
inner tray (nested) and lid is used with chemical sterilant solutions at room temperature.
With chemical sterilization, items are completely immersed and the lumens filled with
sterilant solution. The outside of the bin is labeled with the product name, date of

                                          804
activation, date of expiration, and initials of the person who mixed the solution. The
inside of the bin, inner tray, and its lid should be kept sterile throughout the duration of
use of that batch of solution. The lid should remain on the bin to prevent evaporation of
the solution and to minimize vaporization of the solution. Evaporation changes the
concentration of the mix and will alter the sterilant properties. Formaldehyde and
glutaraldehyde solutions are used in a well-ventilated room. Preparing Items for
Sterilization by Chemical Immersion Items should be clean and free of organic debris
and blood. Items should be washed thoroughly in a nonfilming soapy solution, rinsed,
and thoroughly dried before placing them in the chemical sterilant. Lumens should be
dried with jets of forced air. The solution will become diluted and lose effectiveness if
other solutions Instruments and equipment used in critical areas of the body must be
sterile before use. This means the instruments must be completely free of all forms of
microorganisms. Common methods of sterilization in the patient health care setting
include: • High-temperature steam • Ethylene oxide (EO) gas • Gas plasma
sterilization • Peracetic acid processing • Ozone • Dry heat • Ionizing radiation (used
in commercial manufacturing of sterile goods). This method is used outside the health
care facility and commonly used for bulk sterilization of equipment and supplies.

SELECTING A METHOD

 In the past, surgical technologists and nurses have been confronted with decisions about
which sterilization method to use for items such as wooden tongue depressors,
petroleumbased gauze, liquid in glass bottles, dry powders, and even surgical gloves.
These products are now safely sterilized by the manufacturer using technology such as
cobalt-60 ionizing radiation. The selection criteria for the modern perioperative
environment have changed with advances in technology and economics and with the
increased focus on patient and personnel safety. Whereas in the past “instrument nurses”
were relied on to choose the correct sterilization method for a given item, now the
responsibility has been given over to the manufacturer. The enormous variety of
instruments and equipment used in surgery does not fit easily into a generalized protocol
for selecting a sterilization method. This complexity of methods also means that the
manufacturer’s recommendations must be followed exactly. These methods can also
change quickly when new models are marketed. For example, some endoscopic
instruments must be hand-cleaned and gas- sterilized, whereas others, even those with
digital imaging capability, can be safely sterilized by high pressure steam.

Parameters for sterilization

A method of sterilization is effective only when certain conditions are met. Microbial
destruction depends on the individual phases of the process itself and on the bioburden,
virulence, and resistance of the microorganisms.

                                          805
Time: Items must be exposed to the process long enough to destroy microorganisms. •
Saturation and surface exposure: All parts of the item must be exposed to the sterilization
process.

 Temperature: Some processes depend on the temperature to which the items are
exposed.

Quality of the sterilant, air, and water: The agent must be pure, as must the air and
water used in conjunction with it. Chemical or elemental residue in water can reduce the
efficacy of the process.

Presence of moisture: Humidity is necessary in most sterilization processes.

 Method of packing (where applicable) and loading the sterilizer: This is related to
saturation and exposure. Instruments and supplies that have multiple parts or complex
design may require disassembly before processing and wrapping. Items must be loaded
in a manner that allows the sterilant to penetrate all surfaces. The choice of packaging
materials must be suitable for the process.

The following bacteria are used according to the sterilization process: • Steam
sterilization: Geobacillus stearothermophilus • Dry heat and EO sterilization: Bacillus
subtilis Hydrogen peroxide gas plasma: Bacillus subtilis • Peracetic acid: According to
the manufacturer’s specifications • High-speed steam sterilizer: Geobacillus
stearothermophilus enzyme (fluorescence testing) • Ozone sterilization: Geobacillus
stearothermophilus The test bacteria are encased in a self-contained unit that usually is
placed in the most challenging area of the load—that is, near the outlet drain of the
chamber (steam sterilizer). For EO monitoring, the biological test pack is positioned in
the center of the load. After the sterilization process, the bacterial spores are cultured.
The growth of bacteria in the test culture indicates that the sterilization process probably
was ineffective. If no bacteria grow, all items in the load are presumed to be sterile.
Biological controls should be administered at least once weekly in all sterilizers and
daily if possible. Biological monitors are always used when an artificial implant or
prosthesis is sterilized. If any biological indicator shows a positive result, all items
included in that load are withdrawn from use. The infection control department will be
notified and the event documented. If the items have already been used in patient
treatment, additional safety precautions are immediately implemented, including
notification of the surgeon or other primary health care provider who used the items
during patient care. Figure 11-13 shows examples of biological monitors. Rapid
biological monitoring uses an enzyme that binds to spores. After the sterilization process,
the level of enzyme is measured. This corresponds with destruction of the bacterial
spores. The monitoring system is used for both high pressure steam and EO sterilization.
Results can be obtained in 1 to 4 hours, depending on the sterilization process. Air
                                          806
Detection Testing To test and monitor the efficiency of the high-vacuum steam sterilizer,
a test called the daily air removal test (DART) is performed. Bowie-Dick tests also are
commercially available for this purpose. High-vacuum sterilizers are monitored to detect
air in the chamber during the exposure phase. In these tests, a special package of properly
wrapped towels is taped with heat-sensitive chemical monitor tape and stacked to a
height of 10 or 11 inches (25 to 27.5 cm). The package is then placed by itself in the
sterilization chamber and run for the appropriate time. An unsatisfactory DART
indicates a failure in the vacuum pump system or a defect in the gasket of the sterilizer
door. Unsatisfactory results must be reported to the biomedical engineering staff so that
they can inspect the sterilizer, especially the vacuum system and door seals.

Steam sterilization

Steam sterilization is the most widely used, effective, and efficient method of
sterilization in the health care setting. Normal atmospheric steam is not hot enough to
completely destroy microbes and spores. However, steam under pressure reaches the
extremely high temperatures necessary for sterilization. Steam under pressure coagulates
the nucleic acids and protein that make up the cell’s genetic and enzymatic material.
Pressurized steam also destroys the cell’s resilient outer wall and bacterial spores. Steam
sterilization is achieved according to the temperature, pressure, and exposure time. These
depend on the type of steam sterilizer, the size of the load, the temperature, whether
items are wrapped, and the type of materials or supplies being processed. The entire
process of heating, pressurizing, and timing the load is called a cycle. Modern steam
sterilizers have preprogrammed cycles for these parameters. A steam sterilizer has a
central chamber where goods are placed and a mechanism for creating extremely high
pressure. Steam enters the chamber, air is removed, and the internal pressure increases.
This process heats the steam to the very high temperatures required for sterilization. The
full cycle may differ slightly among models and manufacturers. However, there are three
distinct phases in all types of steam sterilizers:

1. Conditioning (sometimes called preconditioning): Air is removed from the chamber
and replaced with steam.

2. Exposure or holding time: Goods in the chamber are exposed to superheated steam
at a precise temperature and duration. This duration depends on the size of the load,
complexity of materials being sterilized, and whether or not the items were wrapped
before sterilization.

3. Exhaust and drying: Pressure in the chamber is reduced and the load is exposed to
cool air. Two types of steam sterilizers are used in the clinical setting, gravity
displacement and dynamic (also called prevacuum or high-vacuum sterilizers). The main
difference in these types is the actual process of removing air and replacing it with steam.
                                          807
The gravity displacement system injects steam into the chamber and displaces the air,
which escapes by gravity (downward) through a drain. Dynamic air removal sterilizers
use a high-vacuum system to quickly and forcefully evacuate air from the chamber and
replace it with bursts or pulses of steam. Gravity Displacement Sterilizer The gravity
displacement sterilizer (also called a downward displacement sterilizer) operates on the
principle that air is heavier than steam.

All the air must be removed from the inner chamber, because all surfaces of the items
must be exposed to the pressurized steam to ensure sterilization. Any air in the inner
chamber blocks the passage of pressurized steam to the goods and prevents sterilization.
The sterilizer is constructed in such a way that air is displaced downward by gravity
(hence the name gravity displacement sterilizer) and is replaced by steam. Dynamic Air
Removal (Prevacuum) Sterilizer The dynamic air removal (prevacuum) sterilizer pulls
air from the chamber with vacuum force and replaces it with steam. As air is pumped
into the chamber, steam enters in pulsed phases. Air is completely removed with
positive- and negative- pressure pulses. As the pressure increases, so does the
temperature of the steam inside the sterilizer. Superheated steam is possible only with
extremely high pressure. The chamber pressure and temperature are held according to
the specified program, then the steam is removed through a filter, and the chamber
pressure is reduced to normal (atmospheric) temperature. A cool cycle reduces the
temperature to a level at which personnel may safely handle the sterilized goods.

Selection of Items for Steam Sterilization Stainless steel instruments, other items made
of stainless steel, and woven materials are routinely sterilized with steam. However,
many items used in surgery cannot tolerate high pressure, high temperature, and
exposure to steam. The appropriate processing method should always be verified directly
with the manufacturer’s manuals or company representative. Many power-driven
instruments and those that contain an optical system or microprocessor cannot be steam-
sterilized. Some synthetic materials, such as Silastic, Teflon, polyethylene,
polypropylene, and other complex polymers, may also be altered during steam
sterilization. Moisture Concentration (Steam Quality) Effective steam sterilization
requires a specific concentration of moisture. If too little moisture is present, items
become superheated and eventually can be burned. Too much moisture leaves items wet
after removal from the chamber; this can result in contamination of the item. The amount
of moisture in the steam is referred to as the steam quality. Water is converted to steam
at 212° F (100° C). At this temperature, steam is ineffective for sterilization. Steam that
contains more than 97% water is necessary for sterilization to be achieved. Water Quality
although the water used during steam sterilization is filtered, contaminants are still
present. These usually consist of mineral particles that are too small to be trapped by
filters. These minerals are deposited on the surfaces of sterilized items and on the internal
surfaces of the sterilizers. The presence of orange, white, brown, or black spots on

                                           808
sterilized items may indicate the presence of excess minerals in the water supply. As
these minerals become deposited in the box locks of surgical instruments, they can
impair the function of these instruments. Loading and Operation of a Large-Capacity
Steam Sterilizer Large steam sterilizers are used for bulk processing of hospital
equipment, including surgical instruments, basins, linen, drapes, and towels. They
usually are located in the Central Processing department. Loading techniques for any
sterilizer influence the outcome. Large sterilizers used for bulk linens, basins, and
complex instruments multiply the problems of air pockets, overheating, and proper
steam drainage. Careful loading of items in the steam sterilizer is critical, because if the
load is too dense or improperly positioned, air may become trapped in pockets. Items in
these air pockets will not be sterilized.

Instrument pans with mesh or wire bottoms are placed flat on the sterilizer shelf.

Linen packs, because of their density, require special attention. Linen packs are best
sterilized by placing the packs on their sides.

Packs and instrument trays should be placed so that they do not touch, or touch only
loosely, and small items should be placed crosswise over each other.

Heavy packs should be placed at the periphery of the load, where steam enters the
chamber.

Basins, jars, cups, or other containers should be placed on their sides with the lids slightly
ajar so that the air can flow out of them and steam can enter.

Any item with a smooth surface on which water can collect and drip during the cooling
phase of the sterilization cycle should be placed at the bottom of the load.

Modern steam sterilizers are preprogrammed for specific cycles that can be selected by
the operator. Information about each load is stored in memory, and hard copies are
maintained for quality assurance. The total time necessary to expose goods to pressurized
steam and sterilize them depends on the density of the goods and the temperature in the

Flash (immediate-use) sterilizer

A high-speed prevacuum sterilizer is used in the operating room and in other areas of the
hospital to sterilize items for immediate use. Steam sterilization using an abbreviated
cycle at a high temperature is necessary for rapid sterilization. However, advanced
technology leading to new materials and complex equipment has led to equally complex
guidelines for ensuring patient safety. In the past, the term flash sterilization was used to
describe the process of a shortened sterilization cycle for uncovered items. Now,
                                           809
however, there are situations in which items are covered in a variety of ways, even for
immediate use following sterilization. A standards committee composed of members of
accreditation bodies, research professionals, and key health professionals agreed in 2010
that the term flash sterilization does not reflect the complexity of sterilization for
immediate use. The term has been replaced with immediate-use sterilization. Standards
for immediate-use sterilization have been adapted by the Association of Surgical
Technologists as well as other professional organizations.

Ethylene oxide sterilization

Ethylene oxide (EO) is used to sterilize objects that cannot tolerate the heat, moisture,
and pressure of steam sterilization. It can be used for delicate instruments, including
microsurgical instruments and those with optical systems. It is highly penetrating, which
makes it ideal for complex instruments with delicate inner components. EO is a highly
flammable liquid that when blended with inert gas, produces effective sterilization by
destroying the deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and protein structure of microorganisms.
EO is used in a 100% pure form, blended with carbon dioxide gas, or mixed with
hydrochlorofluorocarbons. EO kills microorganisms and their spores by interfering with
the metabolic and reproductive processes of the cell. The process is intensified with both
heat and moisture. The EO sterilizer operates at a low temperature. The temperature of
the gas directly affects the penetration of items in the chamber. Operating temperatures
range from 85° to 100° F (29° to 388° C) for a “cold” cycle and 130° to 145° F (54° to
63° C) for a “warm” cycle. Humidity is required to make spores less resistant to the EO
gas. The preferred moisture content for EO sterilization is 25% to 80%. The length of
exposure depends on the type and density of material to be sterilized, temperature,
humidity, and concentration of the gas. Precautions and Hazards A number of
environmental and safety hazards are associated with EO. Exposure to the gas can cause
burns to skin and mucous membranes. Prolonged occupational exposure to EO gas is
known to cause respiratory damage. EO is a stable compound with a long half-life. Its
advantage as a penetrating sterilant also poses hazards. It is difficult to remove, and the
level of EO residue is not the same in different materials. In addition, it reacts with many
different substances, causing them to disintegrate or creating other toxic compounds,
such as ethylene glycol and ethylene chlorohydrins. These chemicals also are difficult to
remove from the environment. To prevent injury from EO exposure, the Occupational
Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) requires air sampling in areas likely to
contain high concentrations of EO. The level of EO must not exceed 0.5 ppm in any area.
Personal dosimeter badges measure EO exposure. Air samples should be taken regularly
in the sterilization area. Other safety precautions include the installation of an exhaust
system that vents the gas to the outside of the building through an exhaust vent located
above the chamber door. Six to 10 exchanges of fresh air per hour are delivered to the


                                          810
sterilization area. Observing the following precautions reduces occupational and patient
risk:

After the sterilization process is finished, keep the sterilizer door opened slightly for
about 15 minutes.

Make sure goods transported from the sterilizer to the aerator (discussed later) remain
on a transport cart.

Always wear protective gloves when handling unaerated items.

Never retrieve an instrument from the aerator before completion of the approved aeration
period. Do not ask anyone else to do this, even if a surgeon requests it.

Always pull the transport cart rather than pushing it. Pushing the cart places personnel
in back of the air flowing from the unaerated items.

Follow the manufacturer’s exact specifications for aeration. Preparation of Items for Gas

Sterilization all items to be gas-sterilized must be clean and dry. Any water left on
equipment bonds with EO gas and produces a toxic residue, which can cause burns or a
toxic reaction in those who come in contact with it. Any organic material or soil exposed
to EO also may produce toxic residues. Therefore, all items processed for EO gas must
be completely clean. Items are loaded in the sterilizer loosely so that the gas is free to
circulate over every surface. Every attempt should be made to load items that have
similar aeration requirements. Some items must not be gas-sterilized.

Self-assessment question

What three conditions are necessary for any sterilization or disinfection process to be
effective?

Why are instruments processed in the washer decontaminator sterilizer?

What is the purpose of wrapping instruments for steam sterilization?

What disinfectant is approved for cleaning blood spills in the surgical suite?

Why doesn’t a control monitor determine that sterilized goods are sterile?

What is DART?

Describe each of the three levels of the Spaulding classification system.
                                          811
What is immediate-use processing?

What is terminal disinfection?

Why are sterile packages given a lot number?



Case studies

Case 1

While scrubbed, you open a basin set and find a small amount of water pooled in the
bottom of the basin. What are the possible causes of this? What will you do?

Case 2

During the setup for a case, you notice that one of the indicator strips in a pan of
instruments on your back table has not changed color. What should you do?

Case 3

You are employed in a small community hospital. In your first week, you are scrubbed
on a laparotomy case. The circulator opens a single-use electrosurgery pencil that has
been resterilized with EO in the hospital’s Central Processing department. What will you
do?

Case 4

You are the afternoon shift relief scrub on a plastic surgery case. About an hour into the
case on which you have relieved, you happen to notice the chemical sterilization monitor
at the bottom of the instrument tray, which is on the sterile back table. The monitor has
not changed color. The surgeon is using instruments from this tray. What do you do?

Case 5 You are about to scrub on an orthopedic case in which a stainless steel implant
will be inserted into the patient’s hip. The surgeon wants to see the implant before
surgery. He opens the package and examines it with bare hands. He then instructs you
to flash-sterilize the implant. What will you do? Who is responsible? What are the risks
associated with flash sterilization of implants?

Case 6 You have been assigned to work in the endoscopy room for the day. You will
use gastrointestinal endoscopes. When you arrive in the laboratory, you notice that the
endoscope to be used first is soaking in disinfectant solution that has expired (has been
                                          812
held beyond the date approved for disinfection). The physician tells you that he will use
the endoscope anyway. What is your response?

Case 7 While opening sterile goods for a case, you find a basin set that has been wrapped
in one double-thickness wrapper. You are able to open the basin set using sterile
technique. Is it sterile?



References

American Society of Cataract and Refractive Surgery and the American Society of
Ophthalmic Registered Nurses: Recommended practices for cleaning and sterilizing
intraocular surgical instruments,

Accessed July 24, 2011, at http://www.ncbi.hlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17883207#. AORN,
Standards, recommended practices, and guidelines, 2011. Association for the
Advancement of Medical Instrumentation: Comprehensive guide to steam sterilization
and sterility assurance in health care facilities. ANSI/AAMI ST79: 2006.

 Association of perioperative Registered Nurses: Recommended practices for
environmental cleaning in the surgical practice setting. In Standards, recommended
practices and guidelines, 2007 edition, Denver, 2007, AORN.

Association of perioperative Registered Nurses: Recommended practices for
sterilization in the perioperative practice setting. In Standards, recommended practices
and guidelines, 2007 edition, Denver, 2007, AORN.




  Learning outcome 4: Store Operation Theatre instruments and apparatus

Storage of wrapped sterile goods

After an item has been decontaminated, sorted, wrapped, and sterilized, consideration
must be given to how the item can be kept sterile. Time-related sterility measures (based

                                         813
on the length of time since sterilization) are not considered valid. Event-related sterility
or terminal sterilization is the accepted standard. Event-related sterility or terminal
sterilization is based on the principle that sterilized items are assumed sterile between
uses unless environmental conditions or events interfere with the integrity of the
package. Guidelines for Storage Items should be stored according to the following
guidelines:

Sterile items should be stored in areas that are separate from those used to store clean
nonsterile items.

Sterile items must never be stored near sinks or other areas where they can be exposed
to water. Sterile items should be stored in critical areas or in the sterile core when
possible. They should be placed in a draft free area away from vents and windows. The
area must be dust- and lint- free.

Closed cabinets are preferred to open storage areas.

If items are stored in open bins, the bins or drawers should be shallow to prevent excess
handling of the items.

Mesh or basket containers are preferable to those with a solid surface where dust and
bacteria can collect.

Packages should be placed loosely on shelves to prevent crushing, tearing, or damage to
items and wrappers.

Heavy items must never be stacked on top of lighter ones. Stacking heavy instrument
trays poses a risk that wrappers will be torn as the top tray is removed.

Seldom-used items can be wrapped in protective dust covers.

Wrappers should be inspected for damage and expiration before they are opened for use

 Items commercially prepared and sterilized by manufacturers may be considered sterile
indefinitely as long as the wrapper is intact. An expiration date printed on the package
shows the maximum time the manufacturer can guarantee product stability and sterility.

Generalized Safety Factors for the Use of Electrosurgery

Electrical burn through the patient’s skin is the greatest hazard of electrosurgery. These
burns are usually deeper than flame burns, causing widespread tissue necrosis and deep
thrombosis to the extent that debridement and grafting may be required. Not all deep

                                          814
thermal injury is immediately apparent. In addition to the precautions noted for preparing
the ESU and for positioning the dispersive return electrode used with monopolar units,
other precautions should be taken as follows:

 1. Electrosurgery (monopolar and bipolar) should not be used in the mouth, trachea,
around the head, or in the pleural cavity when high concentrations of oxygen or nitrous
oxide are used. During some procedures such as eye surgery, oxygen is administered via
nasal cannula or mask. Oxygen builds up under the drapes and sets the stage for a
combustible situation. Flame-retardant drapes can conceal a fire in a confined space.

 The anesthesia provider is advised to administer medical air instead of oxygen to
minimize the risk of fire. Safety regulations for use with all inhalation anesthetic agents
are followed. Electrocardiogram electrodes should be placed as far away from the
surgical site as possible. Burns can occur at the site of electrocardiogram electrodes and
other low-impedance points from invasive monitor probes if current diverts to alternate
paths of least resistance. Metallic electromyographic or neuro monitoring needles should
not be used.

 Rings and other jewelry should be removed. Metallic jewelry, including those used in
body piercings, presents a potential risk of burn for the patient from diverted currents
from the monopolar unit with either an isolated or ground-referenced output.

 Flammable agents such as alcohol should be used with great care in skin preparation. If
they are used, the skin surface should be completely dry before draping.

 Volatile fumes and vapors may collect in drapes and ignite when the electrosurgical or
cautery unit is used.

 If another piece of electrical equipment is used in direct contact with the patient at the
same time as the ESU, connect it to a different source of current if possible. The cutting
current of the ESU may not work if another piece of electrical equipment is on the same
circuit. The ESU may interfere with the operation of some equipment, such as older
models of cardiac monitors. The isolated power system of solid-state generators may
prevent these problems.

New models of cardiac pacemakers are unaffected by monopolar ESU generators. Other
implanted electrical devices such as defibrillators could malfunction. Check with the
device manufacturer regarding compatibility. The bipolar ESU may be used because
the current does not pass through the patient’s body and return to the generator. The
patient is continuously monitored. A defibrillator should be on standby in the OR.



                                          815
Connection of a bipolar active electrode to a monopolar receptacle may activate current,
causing a short circuit. Plugs on cords should be differentiated to prevent misconnections
of active and inactive electrodes. 8. Secure the active electrode handle in an insulated
holster/ container when not in use. Do not immerse an active electrode in liquid.

 To prevent fire, only moist sponges should be permitted on the sterile field while the
ESU is in use. This includes using moist sponges during the use of battery-operated
electrocautery. Dry sponges can ignite.

Investigate a repeated request by the surgeon for more current. The dispersive return
electrode or connecting cord may be at fault and should be checked first, followed by
the handpiece connection. Shock to those touching the patient may result. The patient
may be burned at the dispersive return electrode site.

For safety of the patient and personnel, follow instructions for use and care; these appear
on the machine or in the manual provided by the manufacturer that accompanies each
ESU. Grasp and pull only the plugs, not cords, when disconnecting attachments from the
generator or the power source. Position the power cord away from the team to avoid
tripping team members. Avoid rolling equipment over the power cord. Disposable cords
should not be cut with scissors.

Any malfunctioning ESU should be labeled with the problem and taken out of service
until cleared for use by biomedical engineering department personnel.

The patient and personnel should be protected from inhaling plume (smoke) generated
during electrosurgery. A suction evacuator device should be placed as close to the source
of plume as possible to maximize evacuation of smoke and enhance visibility at the
surgical site.

 Inspect insulated instruments for breaks in the insulation covering. Current can leak
from fractures in the insulation and create a thermal burn.

References

 1. Bourdon L: RP first look: New recommended practices for cleaning and care of
surgical instruments, AORN Journal 100(6):C1–C9, 2014. 2. Duro M: In focus: Factors
that affect surgical instrument availability and turnover time, AORN Journal 101(1):C7–
C8, 2015. 3. Seavey R: Immediate use sterilization: Moving beyond current policy,
American Journal of Infection Control 41(5):S46–S48, 2013.




                                          816
  Learning outcome 5: Store OT instruments and apparatus

This learning outcome

Storage of Operation Theatre instruments and apparatus

Maintaining Operation Theatre instruments storage records

Principles of Operation Theatre instruments storages

Operation Theatre Storage methods, techniques and structures




                                        817
                                   CHAPTER TEN

 PROVISION OF PERIOPARATIVE THEATRE TECHNICAL SERVICES

Unit of learning code: HE/CU/TT/CR/04/6/A

Related Unit of Competency in Occupational Standard: Provide Perioperative Theatre
Technical Services

 Introduction to the unit of learning

This unit describes the competencies required to provide Perioperative Theatre Technical
Services which involves testing, Prepare to provide Perioperative Theatre Technical
services, Perform Perioperative Theatre Technical services, Evaluate Perioperative
Theatre Technical services, Wind-up Perioperative Theatre Technical services.

Summary of Learning Outcomes

   1.   Prepare to provide Perioperative Theatre Technical services
   2.   Perform Perioperative Theatre Technical services
   3.   Evaluate Perioperative Theatre Technical services
   4.   Wind-up Perioperative Theatre Technical services

  Learning Outcome 1: Prepare to provide Perioperative Theatre Technical
  services

Introduction to the learning outcome

Upon completion of this unit describes the knowledge, skills and attitudes required to
prepare for Safety practices in Perioperative Theatre ,Standard operating
procedures,Aseptic techniques,Perioperative Theatre layout,Perioperative Theatre
instruments    and     apparatus,Perioperative    Theatre      supplies,Types       of

                                           818
  surgeries,Decontamination,Basic anaesthesia ,Basic pharmacology in theatre and
  Perioperative Theatre ethics.

  Identification and reporting of faulty Operation Theatre apparatus

  Performance Standard
      1. Protective gears are worn according to technical services to be offered
      2. Perioperative Theatre environment is prepared in accordance with standard
         operating procedure
      3. Required materials and apparatus are gathered according to the technical services to
         be provided
      4. Condition of the required materials and equipment is checked according to their user
         manuals and manufacturer’s instructions
      5. Theatre equipment and apparatus are arranged according to work place set up and
         standard operating procedures
      6. Identified problem of PT apparatus and equipment is reported according to
         workplace set up

Definition of terms

  Disinfection: Disinfection describes a process that eliminates many or all pathogenic
  microorganisms, except bacterial spores, on inanimate objects

  Sterilization: the process of making something free from bacteria or other living
  microorganisms.



  Content to be covered

  Learning outcome 1: Prepare to provide Perioperative Theatre Technical services

  Safety practices in Perioperative Theatre

  Employers should introduce new members of staff to basic health and safety laws and
  principles. Nurse training incorporates awareness of specific legislation such as Manual
  Handling Operations Regulations 1992, Reporting of Injuries, Diseases and Dangerous
  Occurrences Regulations 1995, and Control of Substances Hazardous to Health 2002.

  There are additional health and safety issues specific to theatres. During the perioperative
  period several members of a multidisciplinary team may be present, together with
  occasional visitors, who may possess varying degrees of knowledge, training and

                                            819
experience. All present have a joint responsibility, within a relatively small and restricted
area and surrounded by specialist equipment and potential hazards, to work towards the
successful completion of the patient’s anaesthesia and surgery (Taylor and Campbell,
1999a).

Government initiatives such as the Essence of Care (DoH, 2001) have increased public
expectations of health care. The detrimental effects of wound infection, both
economically and with regard to patient morbidity, is well known. The role of
decontamination as part of essential control measures is also well documented (Waller,
2002). In the theatre environment, the principles of decontamination and asepsis
underpin many health and safety policies and protocols, with the aim of avoiding the
introduction and spread of infection.

Special consideration must be given to patients under general anaesthetic, as they are
unable to take care of their own safety needs or voice any concerns. Pressure area
protection is a fundamental aspect of nursing care and particular attention should be paid
to this in theatres as patients are incapable of moving at a time when additional risk
factors are present (Hartley, 2003). Staff must ensure that visitors to theatres receive
instruction in health and safety procedures.

During the total perioperative period health and safety procedures apply to all those who
are in the theatre complex, including: All health care staff;Nurses and porters who collect
and return patients to the ward;Administration staff; Sterile service unit
staff;Domestic/housekeeping staff.Theatre preparation.To ensure efficient and safe
running of the theatre list, it should be managed by a designated person, usually the most
senior. There should be sufficient staff on duty, and they should all have a clear
understanding of their role in the team, based on their skills and abilities (Taylor and
Campbell, 1999b).

All equipment should be tested before it is needed, and care should be taken with
electrical equipment so that cables do not present a trip hazard or run across areas where
there is a risk of fluids pooling. The heating should be set at a level that is safe and
comfortable for patients and staff (Parker, 1999).

Infection control

A meticulous theatre-cleaning regime is fundamental to preventing infection. Theatres
should be clean and dust free, ventilation systems must be in working order and doors
must be kept closed.

All items needed for the operation should be in place and an adequate supply of regularly
used items should be on hand to minimise movement to and from theatre during the
                                           820
operation (Taylor and Campbell, 1999b). The theatre floor should be cleaned thoroughly
every day, and floors and surfaces should be damp-dusted between operations, ensuring
any spillage of blood or body fluids is removed (Gould, 2001). A cleaning agent of
proven activity should be used, cloths should be disposable and mop heads should be
sterilised daily (Line, 2003).

Cleaning, disinfection and sterilisation

Reusable instruments should be processed according to local policy, along with theatre
drapes and reusable scrub gowns. Decontamination is defined by Waller (2002) as ‘the
combination of processes including cleaning, disinfection and sterilisation, used to make
a reusable device safe for further use on patients and handling by staff’. Miller (2002)
suggests that the terms cleansing, disinfecting and sterilisation are used synonymously
when they have distinct functions .

Sterile field

This consists of the instrument trolleys, the scrub team and the draped patient. There
must be a wide margin of safety marked by an invisible wall at the trolley edges, which
marks the barrier over which non-sterile items should not cross.

An aseptic technique is essential and sterile items must be received from the circulating
person in a manner that does not contaminate the field. Any breaks in sterility or the
sterile field should be reported immediately to the scrub person so that the contaminated
item can be isolated and removed if possible (Taylor and Campbell, 1999a).

Instruments should be inspected by the scrub nurse and rejected if any visible sign of
contamination remains after the sterilisation process.

The spread of resistant bacteria such as methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
(MRSA) and conditions such as variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) are well
publicised by the media and are of particular concern (Waller, 2002). Patients who pose
a high risk of infection should be left until the end of the case list and universal
precautions strictly observed.

Protective clothing

Protective clothing protects theatre staff from potential infection from pathogenic micro-
organisms and prevents clothing becoming wet or soiled (Xavier, 1999). Any person
who enters a theatre should wear theatre pyjamas. Line (2003) explains that poly-cotton
material allows bacteria through its weave and is easily dampened. This presents a
hazard to staff and patients as body fluids can be absorbed and transferred.
                                           821
The scrub practitioner wears a sterile, long-sleeved gown that is laundered after each
theatre case. With the introduction of new European Union rules regarding the testing of
re-usable materials it has been suggested that it will be increasingly common to use
single-use gowns and drapes that are designed to resist wetting, tearing and bacterial
penetration and dispersal (Line, 2003).

Footwear and gloves

Outside shoes should never be worn in theatre. The hospital should supply non-slip, anti-
static theatre clogs or boots, which should be washed after each use.

Surgeons and scrub nurses who come into contact with sterile body areas wear sterile
gloves (often two pairs). They should be put on according to the local scrubbing-up
policy, ensuring an aseptic technique and taking care that the barrier system of gown and
gloves is not broken where the two meet (Line, 2003; Parker, 1999).

Although wearing gloves does not prevent accidental needlestick injuries, the DoH
(1998b) suggests that they help reduce the volume of blood to which the wearer is
exposed. Clean gloves should be put on by circulating staff before touching patients or
any equipment, specimens, or drapes that could be contaminated.

Theartre tecnitians must wash their hands after wearing gloves as bacterial growth
increases in the moisture that accumulates under them (Xavier, 1999). Concern has been
raised over sensitivity to latex, therefore gloves should be worn only when necessary
and removed immediately after completion of the task (Perry and Barnett, 1998).

Theatre hats and masks

Theatre hats are worn routinely, and prevent loose hair and skin from falling on wounds
or equipment (Parker, 1999). They are only fully effective if they cover the scalp and
also the forehead if the wearer has a fringe.

The surgical mask was introduced over a century ago. Its continued use is controversial
as evidence is not conclusive that wearing a mask reduces postoperative infection.
Wearing a mask, however, does protect the practitioner from contact with body fluids
(Parker, 1999).

When removed, care should be taken to handle masks by the strings so as not to
contaminate the hands with any biological matter and they should be disposed of
immediately (Perry and Barnett, 1998).

Sharps, swabs and instruments
                                         822
It is recommended that counts of swabs, instruments (including scratchpads and
diathermy tips), and sharps (needles and blades) should be undertaken at strategic points
during an operation. This is to ensure no foreign body remains in a patient after closure
of a wound (National Association of Theatre Nurses, 1998).

The scrub practitioner is responsible for counting all items used in an operation before
incision, at first layer closure, and at skin closure. It is also standard practice to give a
verbal report to the surgeon at the end of the procedure to the effect that all sharps, swabs,
and instruments are correct (Pirie, 2004).

The count requires full concentration, should be audible, and should be carried out by
two people, one of whom must be qualified. Both people should sign the theatre register.

The initial count should be recorded before the operation begins and any items that are
added during the course of the operation should be recorded by the circulating nurse. All
items counted during the course of the operation should be recorded clearly on a dry-
wipe board. Items removed from the sterile field should be visibly deleted with a scoring
line or cross (Pirie, 2004; Taylor and Campbell, 1999a).



Each swab counted must be checked to ensure its radiopaque strip is intact. This is
because, in the event of a lost swab (or sharp, or instrument), the surgeon might request
an X-ray to ensure that it has not been left in the patient. Any item deliberately left inside
the patient should be clearly documented in the patient’s notes.

Every sharp object in a theatre should be regarded as a potential source of injury.
Accepted practices in the handling of sharps should be adhered to, for example avoiding
manual re-sheathing of needles, and disposing of sharps in containers that comply with
the British Standard 7320.

Needles, blades or instruments should never be passed directly hand to hand, but should
be passed via a ‘neutral zone’, for example a receiver (Perry and Barnett, 1998). Needles
and blades should be mounted for use using the correct instrument, never the fingers.
Any sharps injury should be managed and reported to occupational health according to
local policy.

Specialist equipment

Electrosurgery (diathermy)



                                           823
Electrosurgical (diathermy) devices use high frequency electrical current to generate
heat, which can cut and coagulate body tissue (Brown, 2000). Diathermy may be used
in either monopolar or bipolar mode. The patient’s skin should be evaluated before and
after diathermy use. Correct use of equipment will ensure that skin integrity remains
intact. The patient should not be in contact with grounded metal objects as the provision
of an alternative pathway for the electrical current could result in a burn. Any metal parts
of the operating table that could come into contact with the patient should therefore be
padded and jewellery and piercings should be removed before arrival in theatre.

Monopolar mode

In monopolar mode the electrical current flows from the generator in the electrosurgery
apparatus to an active electrode, which is the surgeon’s tool. The current continues
through the patient to an adhesive dispersive plate (the return electrode) that is placed
appropriately on the patient’s body so that it is ‘earthed’ safely back to the electrosurgery
unit, thereby preventing an electrical burn. The return electrode should be placed over a
vascular, muscular area to promote electrical conductivity and to dissipate heat.

Shaving may be necessary as hair at the dispersive site prevents complete plate contact
with skin. The plate should not be placed over bony prominences (this can impede return
current), over implanted prostheses (there is a potential for overheating), over scar tissue
or over areas distal to tourniquets where adequate tissue perfusion cannot be guaranteed.

Bipolar mode

In bipolar mode both active and return electrodes are combined within the same
instrument. One prong of the bipolar forceps is active and the other is the return
electrode. This system is safer because the patient does not form part of the electrical
circuit and therefore a dispersive plate is not required. If the patient has a pacemaker,
this is the system of choice to avoid a monopolar current passing through the heart.
However, the low power, low voltage waveform used with this system means it is usually
incapable of cutting (Wicker, 2000).

X-rays

Precautions should be taken to protect theatre personnel from the damaging effects of
exposure to ionising radiation, which are well understood compared with other
occupational risks. In accordance with the Ionising Radiation Regulations 1999, staff
who work with ionising radiation should limit exposure to no more than is reasonably
necessary, and should exercise reasonable care while carrying out such work.



                                           824
Every employee who works with ionising radiation should make full and proper use of
the protective equipment provided. The number of people present in theatre should be
limited to those necessary for the procedure and those present must wear lead aprons. It
is advisable for pregnant women to avoid X-rays because radiation may cause foetal
abnormalities (Smith, 2000).

Hazards from volatile liquids or gases

Theatre ventilation systems help to extract toxic gases that could lead to fatigue, nausea,
headaches and may play a part in a range of health problems including renal, hepatic,
and neural diseases (Pressly, 2000). Therefore any system-failure warning lights should
be reported, investigated and rectified promptly.

Parker (1999) states that the minimum requirement for air changes is 20 per hour in the
actual operating room and the sterile supplies room. The smoke produced when
electrosurgical devices are used contains toxic substances that present biological and
chemical hazards, so extraction systems should be used during procedures involving
diathermy (Wicker, 2000).

It is advisable to avoid the use of flammable solutions with diathermy as there is the risk
of ignition. Methyl methacrylate is a volatile flammable liquid used in orthopaedic
surgery to make bone cement. The vapour given off on mixing may cause irritation of
the eyes and the respiratory passages or a general feeling of ill health. Anyone affected
should leave the theatre immediately. Soft contact lenses should be removed when
methyl methacrylate is being mixed as they are permeable to irritant vapours.

Inhalation anaesthetics may be gases or volatile liquids and require suitable equipment
for storage and administration. Gas cylinders used in theatre must be clearly labelled
with the name or chemical symbol of the gas on the shoulder of the cylinder and the
valve. They should be stored in a cool, well-ventilated room, free from flammable
materials. No lubricant of any description should be used on the cylinder valves.

Nitrous oxide, used in anaesthesia, can be dangerous to both patient and staff if used for
a prolonged period in an inadequately ventilated space. Side-effects can include
megaloblastic anaemia and the depression of white cell formation (British Medical
Association, 2000).

Waste disposal

Parker (1999) explains that theatre design should incorporate a sequence of clean zones
from the entrance to the operating area, to allow easy movement of staff from one clean
area to another.
                                          825
Conversely, waste and contaminated items should be removed through ‘dirty’ areas
without passing through clean areas. Body fluids collected in suction bottles should be
treated with a gelling agent and allowed to solidify before being double-wrapped to
prevent leakage (see case study, Box 2), as should waste tissue and bone fragments. All
clinical waste (placed in yellow bags) should be labelled with the date, theatre number
and case number to allow traceability.



From an environmental point of view, machines are now available that use microwaves
to make used materials safe for disposal in landfill sites. Normal rubbish should be
placed in black bags and disposed of in landfill sites to avoid incineration and minimise
air pollution.



Standard operating procedures



A Standard Operating Procedure is a document which describes the regularly recurring
operations relevant to the quality of the investigation. The purpose of a SOP is to carry
out the operations correctly and always in the same manner. A SOP should be available
at the place where the work is done"



Aseptic techniques

April 24, 2019 admin Latest surgery news 0




                                         826
Figure 1

Definition of aseptic technique

Aseptic technique is a set of specific practices and procedures performed under carefully
controlled conditions with the goal of minimizing contamination by pathogens.

Purpose

Aseptic technique is employed to maximize and maintain asepsis, the absence of
pathogenic organisms, in the clinical setting. The goals of aseptic technique are to protect
the patient from infection and to prevent the spread of pathogens.

Often, practices that clean (remove dirt and other impurities), sanitize (reduce the
number of microorganisms to safe levels), or disinfect (remove most microorganisms
but not highly resistant ones) are not sufficient to prevent infection.

Asepsis and Sterile Technique

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimates that over 27 million
surgical procedures are performed in the United States each year.



Surgical site infections are the third most common nosocomial (hospital-acquired)
infection and are responsible for longer hospital stays and increased costs to the patient
and hospital. Aseptic technique is vital in reducing the morbidity and mortality
associated with surgical infections.

Description

Aseptic technique can be applied in any clinical setting. Pathogens may introduce
infection to the patient through contact with the environment, personnel, or equipment.

Asepsis in the operating room

All patients are potentially vulnerable to infection, although certain situations further
increase vulnerability, such as extensive burns or immune disorders that disturb the
body’s natural defenses. Typical situations that call for aseptic measures include surgery
and the insertion of intravenous lines, urinary catheters, and drains.



                                          827
Surgery Aseptic Technique

Aseptic technique is most strictly applied in the operating room because of the direct and
often extensive disruption of skin and underlying tissue. Aseptic technique helps to
prevent or minimize postoperative infection.

PREOPERATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCEDURES

The most common source of pathogens that cause surgical site infections is the patient.
While microorganisms normally colonize parts in or on the human body without causing
disease, infection may result when this endogenous flora is introduced to tissues exposed
during surgical procedures.

In order to reduce this risk, the patient is prepared or prepped by shaving hair from the
surgical site; cleansing with a disinfectant containing such chemicals as iodine, alcohol,
or chlorhexidine gluconate; and applying sterile drapes around the surgical site.

In all clinical settings, handwashing is an important step in asepsis. The “2002 Standards,
Recommended Practices, and Guidelines” of the Association of Perioperative Registered
Nurses (AORN) states that proper handwashing can be “the single most important
measure to reduce the spread of microorganisms.”

In general settings, hands are to be washed when visibly soiled, before and after contact
with the patient, after contact with other potential sources of microorganisms, before
invasive procedures, and after removal of gloves. Proper handwashing for most clinical
settings involves removal of jewelry, avoidance of clothing contact with the sink, and a
minimum of 10–15 seconds of hand scrubbing with soap, warm water, and vigorous
friction.

A surgical scrub is performed by members of the surgical team who will come into
contact with the sterile field or sterile instruments and equipment. This procedure
requires use of a long-acting, powerful, antimicrobial soap on the hands and forearms
for a longer period of time than used for typical handwashing.

Institutional policy usually designates an acceptable minimum length of time required;
the CDC recommends at least two to five minutes of scrubbing. Thorough drying is
essential, as moist surfaces invite the presence of pathogens. Contact with the faucet or
other potential contaminants should be avoided. The faucet can be turned off with a dry
paper towel, or, in many cases, through use of a foot pedal.

An important principle of aseptic technique is that fluid (a potential mode of pathogen
transmission) flows in the direction of gravity. With this in mind, hands are held below
                                          828
elbows during the surgical scrub and above elbows following the surgical scrub. Despite
this careful scrub, bare hands are always considered potential sources of infection.

Sterile surgical clothing or protective devices such as gloves, face masks, goggles, and
transparent eye/face shields serve as barriers against microorganisms and are donned to
maintain asepsis in the operating room.

This practice includes covering facial hair, tucking hair out of sight, and removing
jewelry or other dangling objects that may harbor unwanted organisms. This garb must
be put on with deliberate care to avoid touching external, sterile surfaces with nonsterile
objects including the skin.

This ensures that potentially contaminated items such as hands and clothing remain
behind protective barriers, thus prohibiting inadvertent entry of microorganisms into
sterile areas. Personnel assist the surgeon to don gloves and garb and arrange equipment
to minimize the risk of contamination.

Donning sterile gloves requires specific technique so that the outer glove is not touched
by the hand. A large cuff exposing the inner glove is created so that the glove may be
grasped during donning.

It is essential to avoid touching nonsterile items once sterile gloves are applied; the hands
may be kept interlaced to avoid inadvertent contamination. Any break in the glove or
touching the glove to a nonsterile surface requires immediate removal and application
of new gloves.

Asepsis in the operating room or for other invasive procedures is also maintained by
creating sterile surgical fields with drapes.

terile drapes are sterilized linens placed on the patient or around the field to delineate
sterile areas. Drapes or wrapped kits of equipment are opened in such a way that the
contents do not touch non-sterile items or surfaces.

Aspects of this method include opening the furthest areas of a package first, avoiding
leaning over the contents, and preventing opened flaps from falling back onto contents.



Equipment and supplies also need careful attention. Medical equipment such as surgical
instruments can be sterilized by chemical treatment, radiation, gas, or heat. Personnel
can take steps to ensure sterility by assessing that sterile packages are dry and intact and
checking sterility indicators such as dates or colored tape that changes color when sterile.
                                           829
INTRAOPERATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCEDURES

In the operating room, staff have assignments so that those who have undergone surgical
scrub and donning of sterile garb are positioned closer to the patient. Only scrubbed
personnel are allowed into the sterile field. Arms of scrubbed staff are to remain within
the field at all times, and reaching below the level of the patient or turning away from
the sterile field are considered breaches in asepsis.

Other “unscrubbed” staff members are assigned to the perimeter and remain on hand to
obtain supplies, acquire assistance, and facilitate communication with outside personnel.
Unscrubbed personnel may relay equipment to scrubbed personnel only in a way that
preserves the sterile field.

For example, an unscrubbed nurse may open a package of forceps in a sterile fashion so
that he or she never touches the sterilized inside portion, the scrubbed staff, or the sterile
field. The uncontaminated item may either be picked up by a scrubbed staff member or
carefully placed on to the sterile field.

The environment contains potential hazards that may spread pathogens through
movement, touch, or proximity. Interventions such as restricting traffic in the operating
room, maintaining positive-pressure airflow (to prevent air from contaminated areas
from entering the operating room), or using low-particle generating garb help to
minimize environmental hazards.

Other principles that are applied to maintain asepsis in the operating room include: All
items in a sterile field must be sterile.

Sterile packages or fields are opened or created as close as possible to time of actual use.

Moist areas are not considered sterile.

Contaminated items must be removed immediately from the sterile

Only areas that can be seen by the clinician are considered sterile (i.e., the back of the
clinician is not sterile).

Gowns are considered sterile only in the front, from chest to waist and from the hands to
slightly above the elbow.

Tables are considered sterile only at or above the level of the table.

Nonsterile items should not cross above a sterile field.

                                           830
There should be no talking, laughing, coughing, or sneezing across a sterile field.

Personnel with colds should avoid working while ill or apply a double mask.

Edges of sterile areas or fields (generally the outer inch) are not considered sterile.

When in doubt about sterility, discard the potentially contaminated item and begin again.

A safe space or margin of safety is maintained between sterile and nonsterile objects and
areas.

When pouring fluids, only the lip and inner cap of the pouring container is considered
sterile; the pouring container should not touch the receiving container, and splashing
should be avoided.

Tears in barriers and expired sterilization dates are considered breaks in sterility.




General habits that help to preserve a clean medical environment include:

safe removal of hazardous waste, i.e., prompt disposal of contaminated needles or blood-
soaked bandages to containers reserved for such purposes

prompt removal of wet or soiled dressings

prevention of accumulation of bodily fluid drainage, i.e., regular checks and emptying
of receptacles such as surgical drains or nasogastric suction containers

avoidance of backward drainage flow toward patient, i.e., keeping drainage tubing below
patient level at all times

immediate clean-up of soiled or moist areas

labeling of all fluid containers with date, time, and timely disposal per institutional policy

maintaining seals on all fluids when not in use

The isolation unit is another clinical setting that requires a high level of attention to
aseptic technique. Isolation is the use of physical separation and strict aseptic technique
for a patient who either has a contagious disease or is immunocompromised.
                                           831
For the patient with a contagious disease, the goal of isolation is to prevent the spread of
infection to others. In the case of respiratory infections (i.e., tuberculosis), the isolation
room is especially designed with a negative pressure system that prevents airborne flow
of pathogens outside the room.

The severely immunocompromised patient is placed in reverse isolation, where the goal
is to avoid introducing any microorganisms to the patient. In these cases, attention to
aseptic technique is especially important to avoid spread of infection in the hospital or
injury to the patient unprotected by sufficient immune defenses.

Entry and exit from the isolation unit involves careful handwashing, use of protective
barriers like gowns and gloves, and care not to introduce or remove potentially
contaminated items. Institutions supply specific guidelines that direct practices for
different types of isolation, i.e., respiratory versus body fluid isolation precautions.

In a multidisciplinary setting, all personnel must constantly monitor their own
movements and practices, those of others, and the status of the overall field to prevent
inadvertent breaks in sterile or clean technique. It is expected that personnel will alert
other staff when the field or objects are potentially contaminated.

Health care workers can also promote asepsis by evaluating, creating, and periodically
updating policies and procedures that relate to this principle.



Perioperative Theatre layout

The adaptive layout for operating theatre (ALOT) problem in hospitals seeks to
determine the ‘most efficient’ layout placement of a set of health-care operating
facilities, corridors and elevators in a designated area subject to a set of constraints on
professional standards.

Such standards include regulations on: hygiene, safety and security of stakeholders
(doctors, medical staff, patients and visitors); movements of technologies; and
specifications of operating rooms (functions, orientations, space sizes, and desired
closeness). Existing ALOT layouts are mostly generated from designs based on
experiential judgments of experts.

 Due to the lack of scientific rigor and huge impact of layout design on the efficiency
and effectiveness of an operating theatre, the paper proposes mixed integer linear
programming models to find optimal layouts under three different design variants:


                                           832
ALOT with multiple sections; ALOT with multiple rows and ALOT with multiple
floors.

Each variant has different demands for personnel, patients, and technologies over a
planning horizon. Operating facilities can exchange functions at rearrangement costs
from one period to another to meet the changing demands.

The general objective consists of two sub-objectives: the first sub-objective is to
minimize the total sum of the rearrangement and travel costs whereas the second sub-
objective is to maximize the total sum of desired closeness among facilities.
Computational experiences are presented on a set of quasi-real data instances for a
hospital in France. They demonstrate the effectiveness of the formulations in providing
optimal layouts for realistic-sized instances. Conclusion and future research directions
are presented.




Perioperative Theatre instruments and apparatus

operating room equipment list for operation theatre Surgical Lamp Light. It has the wall
mounted and Floor stand type,it shows the wall mounted type in the above picture. ...x-


                                         833
ray machine. ...Surgical table bed. ...patient monitor. ...Trolley. ...Anaesthesia machine.
...Infusion pump. ...Pendant.




•




Perioperative Theatre supplies




                                          834
Operating rooms (ORs) are specialized workspaces that require highly functional
equipment of the highest quality, which surgeons and other OR personnel use to perform
lifesaving procedures.

Without this equipment in place, OR professionals may struggle to deliver the care that
patients need. There is a definite number of essential operating room equipment that OR
professionals need on a per case basis. Each piece of equipment serves a distinct purpose
and makes it easier for OR personnel to get the job done.

Here’s a closer look at some of the most common required OR equipment that serve the
needs of OR staff and patients everyday.

1. Utility Columns

Utility columns accommodate a variety of OR-administered services, ensuring better
management of workspace in an OR. The columns can also be retractable or fixed and
provide a viable solution for the distribution of communication units, electrical services
and medical gases in OR suites.

With utility columns, surgeons can access electrical devices that are pre-wired, along
with medical gas outlets that include a single point connection at the top of the unit.

The columns can even be integrated with a CO2 or nitrogen control panel to help
surgeons deliver better patient support. Utility columns can be raised or lowered with
ease.

When a utility column is raised, it provides additional space; when the column is
lowered, it ensures that surgeons can hook up to various OR-administered services
immediately.




                                          835
2. Surgical and Exam Lights

surgical lights in the OR

Operating on a patient is challenging, and surgical lights empower medical professionals
to work to the best of their ability.




Picking top-of-the-line surgical and exam lights ensure these professionals can enjoy the
benefits of working in a well-lit OR at all times.

Many diverse surgical and exam lights currently are available, including:Ceiling-
mounted surgical lights: Ceiling-mounted LED and halogen lights are among the top
options available to brighten your OR.

Mobile surgical lights: Is your OR in transition? In a temporary room, or for a short-term
solution, you simply cannot go wrong with mobile lights. Mobile surgical lights are
bright and powerful, providing the ideal combination for just about any OR.

Surgical headlights: Light, bright and comfortable, surgical headlights provide surgeons
with extra illumination right at the spot they are investigating. These headlights are
                                          836
lightweight and comfortable and will illuminate just about any space immediately.
Adding first-rate surgical and exam lights is necessary for an OR, regardless of a
hospital’s size. With these lights at your disposal, you’ll be better equipped to maintain
a secure, productive work environment.

3. Stretchers and Stretcher Accessories

Transporting a patient from one room to the next?

You’ll be able to do so quickly and effortlessly if you deploy first-rate patient transfer
stretchers for your OR. Hospital stretchers are crucial for various surgical procedures,
such as ophthalmologic, bariatric and paediatric. They are designed to help patients
remain comfortable and accessible. Stretcher accessories can customize a patient
transport stretcher into a specific use stretcher. For example, Meditek manufactured a
paediatric enclosure accessory for its line of QA3 stretchers, making the QA3 ideal for
children with the combination of the enclosure keeping them safe and the stretcher’s
lowest height ability.

4. Cushions and Mattresses

 Whenever a new patient arrives, you’ll want to be ready to ensure that he or she can
receive support in a plush or firm bed. Many cushions and mattresses are available that
are designed to assist patients of all ages and sizes.

ideal mattresses in the OR

Mattresses and cushions can be purchased as complete sets or as separate leg, head, or
body cushions. Two of the most common surgical table cushions include:

Standard Surgical Table Pads – As electrically conductive cushions, standard surgical
table pads feature a supportive urethane core and Lectrolite covering that is simple to
clean. The cushions also can help patients avoid bedsores and are ideal for patients
during shorter medical procedures.

Premium Sof-Care Deluxe Surgical Table Pads – For superior pressure management and
enhanced positioning capabilities, the Premium Sof-Care Deluxe surgical table pads
represent great options. The surgical table pads feature an electrically conductive four-
way anti-stretch cover for increased durability, fluid-resistant seams to reduce the risk
of cross-contamination, and other features that make the table pads valuable in an OR.




                                          837
Selecting the right cushions and mattresses – and ensuring they are available to patients
every day – is crucial. With a dependable supplier of bedding at your side, you should
have no trouble finding the ideal padding for your OR.

5. Space Management Booms

An everyday OR can become a stressful place to work if there is limited space. In fact,
stress remains an ongoing problem among OR personnel, which is reflected in recent
data. A study of OR personnel published by the Thrita medical journal indicated 48
percent of nurses said they experienced “work overload” that led to increased stress
levels. Also, the study revealed OR technicians usually experienced higher stress levels
than other OR personnel. Physical environment factors can affect a medical
professional’s stress levels. Comparatively, space management booms may help medical
personnel conserve space, increase their productivity, and minimize their stress levels
simultaneously. Space management booms can be added to almost any OR, regardless
of size, and enable medical professionals to make the most of the available space in this
room.

6. Sterilization and Cleaning Equipment

No one wants to put themselves or their patients at risk of infection, and sterilization and
cleaning equipment is available that can make a world of difference for OR personnel
and their patients. To better understand the importance of sterilization and cleaning
equipment in ORs, let’s consider the results of a recent study on OR foot traffic
conducted by Orthopaedics.

The study, which examined “the number and length of door openings during nearly 200
knee and hip arthroplasty surgeries performed at Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical
Centre over three months,” showed excessive door openings and foot traffic could put
OR personnel and their patients at greater risk of infection. Study researchers found that
OR doors were open during nearly one-third of knee and hip arthroplasty surgeries.

These open doors commonly defeated the purpose of many safety tactics that medical
personnel used to keep ORs germ- and contamination-free, according to study
researchers. “Our findings add to a growing body of evidence of a relatively common
practice that could be a potential safety concern and raises questions about why doors
get opened and how we can prevent or minimize the frequency and duration of
behaviours that could compromise OR sterility,” study senior author Stephen Belkoff,
Ph.D., said in a prepared statement.

 “We know for sure is that there was a whole lot more traffic in and out of the OR than
seems necessary or easily explained.” Sterilization and cleaning equipment, on the other
                                          838
hand, enables OR personnel to devote the necessary time and resources to maintain
pristine work environments. This equipment allows medical professionals to protect
themselves and their patients against a wide range of potential hazards, such as hospital
acquired infections.



7. Disposables and Consumables

Facemasks and other disposables and consumables help safeguard an OR surgeon as well
as team members and patients consistently. Many top-of-the-line disposables and
consumables such as biohazard bags, patient care gloves, and waterproofing pads are
available and designed for single use. That way, after you are finished using a single
disposable or consumable item, you’ll be able to replace it for the next patient to improve
your chances of maintaining a safe work environment.

8. Gel Pads and Positioners

Imagine what it would be like to provide patients with unparalleled support to help them
combat general pain and soreness. Thanks to gel pads and positioners, you’ll be able to
do just that, as these items enable a patient to sit or rest comfortably and avoid skin or
tissue damage. Gel pads and positioners typically offer a number of benefits for patients,
including:

Can be heated or cooled instantly.

Repairable and reusable for long-lasting value.

Can’t be affected by body fluids, and are easy to clean.

Serve as cost-effective options, making them great choices for hospitals of all sizes.

Leakproof, guaranteeing you won’t have to worry about each product’s interior spilling
out.

9. Surgical Tables and Surgical Table Accessories

A high-quality surgical table and surgical table accessories are at the core of ensuring
your OR team can perform the surgery at hand with confidence.

OR surgical tables high quality image


                                          839
Surgical tables are valuable for surgeons during both open and minimally invasive
procedures. The tables are manufactured for general surgery, neurology procedures, and
other OR applications. Whether performing general or specialized surgeries, surgical
table accessories will make either more efficient and comfortable for the patient.

A list of general and specific use accessories:

Anaesthesia Screens

Arm & Hand Surgery Tables

Arm Supports

Clamps

Drain Pans, Hoops & Screens

Head Supports

Leg Supports

Positioners

Restraint Straps

Side Extensions

Transfer Boards




                                          840
Types of surgeries




                     841
There are various types of surgery and they can be classified based on different
parameters

Based on Timing Surgery can be classified based on the urgency and need to perform
the surgery.

Elective Surgery

The name “elective” might imply that this type of surgery is optional, but that’s not
always the case. An elective procedure is simply one that is planned in advance, rather
than one that’s done in an emergency situation. A wide range of surgical procedures can
be considered elective surgery. Cosmetic surgeries fall into this category, but so can
things like ear tubes, tonsillectomies, and scoliosis surgery. Although these procedures
may be done “electively,” they can be significant and potentially life-changing
operations.

Semi-elective Surgery

Semi-elective surgery is a surgery that must be done to preserve the patient’s life, but
does not need to be performed immediately.

Urgent Surgery

An urgent surgery is one that can wait until the patient is medically stable, but should
generally be done today or tomorrow

Emergency Surgery

An emergency surgery is one that must be performed without delay; the patient has no
choice other than immediate surgery, if they do not want to risk permanent disability or
death.

Based on Body Part

Surgery can also be classified based on the body part that is being operated on. When
surgery is performed on one organ system or structure, it may be classed by the tissue,
organ or organ system involved. Examples include:

Gastrointestinal surgery
                                         842
This type of surgery is performed within the digestive tract and its accessory organs.
Gastrointestinal surgery involves the treatment for diseases of the parts of the body
involved in digestion. This includes the oesophagus, stomach, small intestine, large
intestine, and rectum. It also includes the liver, gallbladder, and pancreas

Orthopaedic surgery

This is performed on bones or muscles. The medical specialty dedicated to the diagnosis,
treatment, rehabilitation, and prevention of injuries of the musculoskeletal system
including the muscles, bones, spine, joints, ligaments, tendons, and nerves.

Cardiovascular Surgery

Cardiovascular surgery is the surgical treatment of diseases and disorders of the heart
and blood vessels. Examples of cardiovascular surgery include open heart surgery such
as coronary artery bypass grafting, heart valve replacements, heart transplant and
vascular surgery such as abdominal aortic aneurysm repairs and femoral-tibial bypass
grafting.

Gynaecology

Gynaecology refers to the surgical specialty dealing with the health of the female
reproductive system (uterus, vagina and ovaries).

Neurosurgery

The surgical specialty involved in the treatment of disorders of the brain, spinal cord,
and peripheral nerves.

Ophthalmology (Eyes)

A medical specialty focusing on the diagnosis and treatment of disorders of the eye.
Conditions include cataracts, glaucoma, and conjunctivitis, among others.

Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery

A dental specialty focusing on the diagnosis and surgical treatment of diseases, injuries
and defects of the mouth, teeth and gums. Examples of oral surgery include removal of
wisdom teeth, facial injury repair, cleft lip and palate repair, and repair of uneven jaws.

Otolaryngology – Ears, Nose and Throat (ENT)


                                          843
Otolaryngology is the medical and surgical treatment of the head and neck, including
ears, nose and throat.

Thoracic

This is also known as Cardiothoracic surgery. This is the field of medicine involved in
surgical treatment of organs inside the thorax (the chest)—generally treatment of
conditions of the heart (heart disease) and lungs (lung disease).

Urology

This is a type of surgery that is performed on the urinary tract. It is a surgical specialty
that deals with problems affecting the urinary tract including kidneys, bladder, and
prostate.

Based on Equipment Used

Surgery can also be classified based on the type of surgical equipment’s used for the
procedure.

Robotic Surgery

Robotic surgery makes use of a surgical robot, such as the Da Vinci or the Zeus surgical
systems, to control the instrumentation under the direction of the surgeon. Da Vinci’s
advanced level of technology takes surgery beyond the limits of the human hand. This
da Vinci Surgical System compliments our goal of extending minimally invasive surgery
to the broadest base of patients including but not limited to: cholecystectomy
(gallbladder removal), hysterectomies, myomectomies, hiatal and hernia repairs,
removal of one or both adrenal glands, GERD related diagnoses (Reflux), and
oesophageal stricture.

The da Vinci Surgical System offers

Enhanced 3D, high-definition vision of operative field, with up to 10x magnification

New optimal dual console, which allows a second surgeon to provide assistance

Ability to mimic the surgeon’s hand movements with enhanced dexterity

Microsurgery

Microsurgery involves the use of an operating microscope for the surgeon to see small
structures.
                                          844
The most obvious developments have been procedures developed to allow anastomosis
of successively smaller blood vessels and nerves (typically 1 mm in diameter) which
have allowed transfer of tissue from one part of the body to another and re-attachment
of severed parts. Microsurgical techniques are utilized by several specialties today, such
as Replantation, Transplantation, treatment of infertility, etc

Laser Surgery

Laser surgery involves use of a laser for cutting tissue instead of a scalpel or similar
surgical instruments.

Laser surgery is commonly used on the eye. Techniques used include LASIK, which is
used to correct near and far-sightedness in vision, and photorefractive keratectomy, a
procedure which permanently reshapes the cornea using an excimer laser to remove a
small amount of the human tissue.

Based on degree of invasiveness

Surgery can also be classified based on the degree of invasiness of the surgical
procedure. By invasion, this refers to the medical procedure in which the part of the body
is entered by incision.

Minimally Invasive Surgery

Minimally invasive surgery is any technique involved in surgery that does not require a
large incision. This relatively new approach allows the patient to recuperate faster with
less pain. Not all conditions are suitable for minimally invasive surgery. Many surgery
techniques now fall under minimally invasive surgery: Laparoscopy, Endoscopy,
Arthroscopy and many others.

Open Surgery

An “open” surgery means the cutting of skin and tissues so that the surgeon has a full
view of the structures or organs involved. Examples of open surgery are the removal of
the organs, such as the gallbladder or kidneys.

Based on purpose

Surgery can also be classified based on the purpose for which the surgery is being
performed. Surgeries are performed for various purposes and such can be classified
based on the purpose for the surgery.


                                          845
Exploratory surgery

Exploratory surgery is a diagnostic method used by doctors when trying to find a
diagnosis for an ailment. It is used most commonly to diagnose or locate cancer in
humans.

Therapeutic surgery

Therapeutic surgery treats a previously diagnosed condition

Cosmetic surgery

Cosmetic surgery is where a person chooses to have an operation, or invasive medical
procedure, to change their physical appearance for cosmetic rather than medical reasons.

In conclusion, there are different types of surgery and they are classified based on a
number parameters ranging from timing, body parts, equipment and purpose of the
surgery.

Decontamination

Decontamination is the process of removing or neutralizing chemical or biological
agents so that they no longer pose a hazard. For military purposes, decontamination is
undertaken to restore the combat effectiveness of equipment and personnel as rapidly as
possible. Most current decontamination systems are labour and resource intensive,
require excessive amounts of water, are corrosive and/or toxic, and are not considered
environmentally safe. Current R&D is focused on developing decontamination systems
that would overcome these limitations and effectively decontaminate a broad spectrum
of CB agents from all surfaces and materials.



R&D on decontamination has evolved over the years. Ideally, these efforts would result
in the identification and deployment of a "universal" decontaminating system. However,
this has not happened. During and after the 1950s, most decontamination involved
aqueous-based systems or the nonaqueous Decontamination Solution Number 2 (DS2),
both of which have weaknesses. Aqueous-based systems require large amounts of water
(often not available on a battlefield) and are very inefficient at removing agent that has
been adsorbed onto or absorbed into a painted surface. In addition, the contaminated
water must be gotten rid of. DS2 is too corrosive for many applications. Ongoing

                                          846
attempts to develop dry systems (referred to euphemistically as "magic pixie dusts") that
would be easy to transport and use, would not require large amounts of fluids, and could
replace DS2 or aqueous systems, have not yet been successful.




Fixed sites that are critical to the deployment of troops have now become attractive and
vulnerable targets for CB attack, increasing the importance of protecting them or, if
protection is impossible, improving our ability to restore contaminated sites and
equipment to operational status. The focus of R&D has, therefore, been shifted from the
decontamination of mobile forces to the decontamination of fixed sites. The key
differences between decontamination of fixed sites and mobile forces are summarized

Basic anaesthesia

Basic anaesthetic techniques

General anaesthesia (GA)

As a novice trainee, general anaesthesia is the most common type of anaesthetic that you
will be required to provide and become competent with as part of the IAC.

General anaesthesia consists of a triad of:

unconsciousness

analgesia

+/- muscle relaxation.

A general anaesthetic (GA) can be subdivided into 3 key stages:

induction - getting the patient to sleep

maintenance - keeping the patient asleep during the operation

emergence - waking the patient up at the end of the procedure.

The most common techniques you will be exposed to are:

spontaneous ventilation with a laryngeal mask airway (GA LMA SV)
                                           847
intermittent positive pressure ventilation with an endotracheal tube (GA ETT IPPV)

Rapid Sequence Induction to protect the airway if there is a risk of soiling from gastric
contents (RSI GA ETT IPPV).

Your choice of technique will be influenced by specific patient, surgical and anaesthetic
factors, as well as the level of your experience in the specialty and its related
subspecialties.

The sections that follow will give you a broad overview and the basic principles
underpinning these three techniques.

General anaesthesia: spontaneous ventilation with an LMA

Generally used for elective or emergency surgery in patients who have been fasted and
where there is no risk of aspiration of gastric contents. Common risk factors for
aspiration include:

history or reflux or hiatus hernia intra-abdominal pathology pregnancy recent major
trauma or administration of opiates morbid obesity autonomic dysfunction associated
with diabetes.

Suitable for most peripheral surgery in patients who are not obese and for some minor
abdominal surgery where muscle relaxation is not needed (i.e. elective inguinal hernia
repair).

Can be used for patients in the supine or lateral position. Not recommended for use in
very long cases. Experienced anaesthetists may use this technique in ENT and
Maxillofacial surgery for short procedures. Basic principles in ASA 1/2 patient: attach
basic monitoring (SpO2, ECG and NIBP) pre-oxygenate the patient

induction - intravenous (propofol) or inhalational induction (sevoflurane) + small dose
of fentanyl followed by insertion of LMA

maintenance - oxygen/air or oxygen/nitrous oxide plus volatile or intravenous agent

emergence – 100% Oxygen and turn off volatile or intravenous agent. Remove LMA
when patient wakes up.

General anaesthesia: endotracheal intubation and positive pressure ventilation



                                         848
  Generally used for elective or emergency surgery in patients who have been fasted and
  where there is no risk of aspiration of gastric contents but where:

  muscle relaxation is required to facilitate surgery

  surgery will increase intra-abdominal pressure or the bowel will be manipulated



  Used for elective or emergency surgery in patients who are either not fasted or where
  there is a risk of aspiration of gastric contents. The airway is protected from aspiration
  by the application of cricoid pressure prior to rapid intubation using a depolarizing
  muscle relaxant. Thereafter, the anaesthetic technique is the same as an ETT with IPPV
  in the previous section.



  Basic principles in ASA 1/2 patient: attach basic monitoring (SpO2, ECG and NIBP)
  pre-oxygenate the patient for 3 minutes proper preparation – tipping trolley, suction
  available, equipment checked induction intravenous (thiopental or propofol)
  suxamethonium to facilitate intubation with cricoid pressure applied by anaesthetic
  assistant to prevent aspiration oral intubation and confirmation of tube placement by
  visualization, auscultation and capnography release of cricoid pressure non-depolarizing
  muscle relaxant to maintain muscle relaxation maintenance oxygen/air or oxygen/nitrous
  oxide plus volatile agent top up doses of muscle relaxant guided by neuromuscular
  monitoring additional analgesia as required emergence 100% oxygen turn off volatile or
  intravenous agent reverse neuromuscular block remove ETT when patient spontaneously
  breathing, regains airway reflexes and wakes up it is recommended that this is performed
  with the patient in the left lateral position. Other types of anaesthesia Local infiltration
  Good choice for skin and soft-tissue surgery of limited size, depth and duration, e.g. ring
  block for a distal finger operation.



  Regional anaesthesia Achieved by introducing a local anaesthetic agent near the nerves
  supplying that region. May be used as the sole mode of anaesthesia or combined with
  general anaesthesia or sedation



Basic pharmacology in theatre


                                            849
DRUGS ACTING ON THE CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM

To facilitate the understanding of the pharmacological and unwanted effects of CNS
drugs, the physiological functions of the main CNS neurotransmitters are discussed
briefly. Noradrenaline. Noradrenergic transmission is important in control of mood
(functional deficiency resulting depression) controlling wakefulness, and alertness.
Dopamine. Dopamine is important in motor control (Parkinsonism is due to dopamine
deficiency), has behavioural effects (excessive dopamine activity is implicated in
schizophrenia), important in hormone release (prolactin, GH) and dopamine in
chemoreceptor trigor zone causes nausea and vomiting.5-HT.

Physiological functions associated with 5-HT pathways include; feeding behaviour,
behavioural response (hallucinatory behaviour), control of mood and emotion, control
of body temperature and vomiting. Acetylcholine (Ach).

 Ach has effects on arousal, on learning, and on short-term memory. Dementia and
parkinsonism are associated with abnormalities in cholinergic pathways. GABA. GABA
is an inhibitory neurotransmitter in CNS.Glycine. is an inhibitory neurotransmitter, acts
on GABA like receptor in the spinal cord?

GENERAL ANESTHETICS

General anesthesia involves the physiological changes: Reversible loss of response to
painful stimuli, loss of consciousness and loss of motor and autonomic reflexes. Loss of
consciousness is associated with inhibition of the activity of reticular formation. General
anesthetics are administered by inhalation or by intravenous routes. They are classified
into two on the basis of their route of administration as inhalation and intravenous
anesthetics.

Inhalation anesthetics.

The main agents are: Halothane, nitrous oxide, enflurane and ether.

1. Halothane: Is the most widely used agent, highly lipid soluble, potent. It causes
arrhythmia,

hangover and the risk of liver damage is high if used repeatedly.

2. Nitrous oxide: Oderless and colourless gas. It is rapid in action and also an effective

analgesic agent. Its potency is low, hence must be combined with other agents. It is a
relatively

                                          850
free of serious unwanted effects.

3. Enflurane: Halogenated ether (similar to halothane). Poorly metabolized in the liver,
thus

less toxic than halothane. It is faster in its action, less liable to accumulate in the body
fat

compared to halothane. It causes seizure during induction and following recovery from
anaesthesia.

4. Ether: Has analgesic and muscle relaxant properties. It is highly explosive, causes

respiratory tract irritation, postoperative nausea and vomiting. It is not widely used
currently.

INTRAVENOUS ANESTHETICS

Intravenous anesthetics act much more rapidly, producing unconsciousness in about 20

seconds, as soon as the drug reaches the brain from the site of its injection. These agents
used

for induction of anaesthesia followed by inhalation agent. The main induction agent in
current

use is: thiopentone, etomidate, propofol, ketamine and short acting benzodiazepine

(midazolam).

Thiopentone: Thiopentone is a barbiturate with very high lipid solubility. After
intravenous

administration the drug enters to tissues with a large blood flow (liver, kidneys, brain,
etc) and

more slowly to muscle. Uptake into body fat occurs slowly because of the low blood
flow to this

tissue, which may cause prolonged effect if given repeatedly. It causes cardiovascular




                                          851
depression. Etomidate: It is more quickly metabolized and the risk of cardiovascular
depression is less compared to thiopentone. Etomidate suppresses the adrenal cortex,
which has been associated.with an increase in mortality in severely ill patients.

Ketamine: acts more slowly than thiopentone and produces a different effect, known as

dissociative anaesthesia in which there is a marked sensory loss and analgesia, as well
as

amnesia and paralysis of movement, without actual loss of consciousness. Ketamine
causes

dysphoria, hallucinations during recovery.Benzodiazepines including diazepam,
lorazepam, and midazolam are used in general anesthetic procedures. Compared with
intravenous barbiturates, benzodiazepines produce a slower onset of central nervous
system effects. Benzodiazepines prolong the postanesthetic recovery period but also
cause a high incidence of amnesia for events occurring after the drug is administered.The
benzodiazepines are useful in anesthesia as premedication and intraoperative sedation.

Opioid analgesic anesthesia: Opioid analgesics can be used for general anesthesia, in
patients undergoing cardiac surgery and fentanyl and its derivates are commonly used
for these purposes.

Preanesthetic medication: It is the use of drugs prior to the administration of anaesthetic
agent with the important objective of making anaesthesia safer and more agreable to the
patient. The drugs commonly used are, opioid analgesics, barbiturates, anticholinergics,
anti emetics and glucocorticoids.

SEDATIVE AND HYPNOTIC DRUGS

Anxiolytic drugs are used to treat the symptoms of anxiety, where as hypnotic drugs used
to treat insomnia. The same drugs are used for both purposes.Classes of anxiolytic and
hypnotic drugs: The main groups of the drugs are:1. Benzodiazepines. Benzodiazepines
are the most important group, used as sedative and hypnotic agents.2. 5- HT1A receptor
agonist (e.g. buspirone). It is recently introduced anxiolytic.3. Barbiturates
(phenobarbitone).

They are nowadays less commonly used as sedativehypnotics.4. β -adrenoceptor
antagonists (e.g. propranolol). They are used to treat some forms of anxiety,where
physical symptoms (sweating, tremor, and tachycardia), are troublesome. They are not
used as hypnotics. 5. Miscellaneous drugs (chloral hydrate, paraldehyde, and
diphenhydramine). These drugs are not commonly recommended for axiety or
                                          852
insomia.Benzodiazepines Benzodiazepines are well absorbed when given orally. They
bind strongly to plasma proteins,however, many of them accumulate gradually in the
body fat (i.e. they are highly lipid soluble).Benzodiazepines are inactivated by the liver
and excreted in the urine.Based on their duration of action roughly divided into short
acting (flurazepam, triazolam),medium acting (alprazepam, lorazepam) and long acting
compounds (diazepam,chlordiazepoxide, clonazepam).Pharmacodynamics Act by
binding to a specific regulatory site on the GABAA receptor, thus enhancing the
inhibitory effects of GABA. Central nervous system effects of benzodiazepines include:

1. Reduction of anxiety and aggression.

2. Sedation and induction of sleep.

3. Reduction of muscle tone and coordination.

4. Anticonvulsant effects.

Clinical Uses

• Treatment insomnia

• Anxiety

• Preoperative mediations

• Acute alcohol withdrawal

• As anticonvulsants

• Chronic muscle spasm and spasticity

Unwanted effects

• Toxic effects due to acute overdosage causes prolonged sleep.

• Unwanted effects occurring during normal therapeutic use includes: drowsiness,

confusion, amnesia, and impaired motor coordination. Tolerance and dependence:
Pharmacokinetic and tissue tolerance and also cause physical dependence. i.e. stopping
benzodiazepines treatment after weeks or months causes an increase in symptoms of
anxiety.


                                          853
5 - HT1A receptor agonist Buspirone is a potent agonist of. 5 - HT1A receptors.
Anxiolytic effects take days to weeks to develop. Buspirone does not cause sedation,
motor incoordination and withdrawal effects. The main side effects are nausea,
dizziness, headache, and restlessness.

Barbiturates

They are non-selective CNS depressants, which produce effects ranging from sedation
and reduction of anxiety, to unconsciousness and death from respiratory and
cardiovascular failure.

Barbiturates act by enhancing action of GABA, but less specific than benzodiazepines.
They are potent inducers of hepatic drug metabolizing enzymes, hence likely to cause
drug interaction.

Tolerance and dependence occur, more than benzodiazepines.

ANTIEPILEPTIC DRUGS

Seizure is associated with the episodic high frequency discharge of impulses by a group
of

neurons in the brain.

Seizure may be partial or generalized depending on the location and the spread of the

abnormal neuronal discharge. The attack mainly involves motor, sensory or behavioural

phenomena.

Partial seizures are often associated with damage to the brain, whereas generalized
seizure

occurs without obvious cause. Two common forms of generalized seizures are grand mal
and

petit mal.

Mechanism of action

Anticonvulsant drugs act by two mechanisms: by reducing electrical excitability of cell

membrane and by enhancing GABA mediated synaptic transmission.
                                        854
The main drugs used in the treatment of epilepsy are phenytoin, carbamazepine,
valproate,

ethosuximide and phenobarbitone.

Phenytoin

It is commonly used antiepileptic drug. It is effective against different forms of partial
and

generalized seizures; however it is not effective in absence seizures.

Well absorbed when given orally. It is metabolised by the liver. It is liver enzyme inducer
and

therefore, increases the rate of metabolism of other drugs. Main side effects are sedation,
confusion, gum hyperplasia, skin rash, anaemia, nystagmus,and diplopia.

Carbamazepine

It is derived from tricyclic antidepressant. Its pharmacological action resembles those of

phenytoin, however, it is chiefly effective in the treatment of partial seizure. It is also
used in the

treatment of trigeminal neuralgia and manic-depressive illness.

It is powerful inducer of liver microsomal enzymes, thus accelerates the metabolism of

phenytoin, warfarin, oral contraceptives and corticosteroids.

Carbamazepine causes sedation, mental disturbances and water retention.Valproate

Valproate is chemically unrelated to the other antiepileptic drugs. The mechanism of
action is

unknown. It is used in grand mal, partial, petit mal and myoclonic seizure.Relatively has
few side effects, however, it is potentially hepatotoxic. It is non sedating.

Ethosuximide

Has fewer side effects and used in the treatment of absence seizures.

                                          855
Phenobarbitone

It is well absorbed after oral administration and widely distributed. Renal excretion is
enhanced

by acidification of the urine. Phenobarbitone is liver enzyme inducer and hence
accelerates the

metabolism of many drugs like oral contraceptives and warfarin.

The clinical use of phenobarbitone is nearly the same as that of phenytoin. The most
important

unwanted effect is sedation.

Benzodiazepines: Clonazepam and related compounds, clobazam are claimed to be
relatively

selective as antiepileptic drugs. Sedation is the main side effect of these compounds, and
an

added problem may be the withdrawal syndrome, which results in an exacerbation of
seizures if

the drug is stopped.

Perioperative Theatre ethics

Medico–legal aspect of perioperative theatre care

Introduction

A basic principle of patient care is to do no further harm. A health care provider usually
avoids legal exposure if he or she acts:

According to an appropriate standard of care

Ethics and law

Law - a body of principles recognized and applied by the state in the administration

Ethics - Ethics are quite distinct from legal law, although these do overlap in important
ways
                                          856
Laws applicable to nursing

Public Health Act cap 242 implies that the people of Kenya are entitled to properly
secured and maintained health care services which are available resources of the state

Right to considerate and respectful care from all members of the health care system at
all times and under all circumstances Laws applicable to patient care

Patients of bills of right to information (disclosure): preventive health care including
health education, Individual own diagnosis and specific treatment program

Right to informed choices, participation in treatment opinion and decisions Right to
access emergency services when and where the need arises. Patients of bill of rights
Right to privacy, dignity and comfort Right to

Right to

Confidentiality safety

 Right to expect reasonable coordination and continuity of care i.e. appointment dates,
and Drs. who will be continuing with care after is discharge Medical negligence and
malpractice

Negligence Unintentional breach of duty or failure Malpractice Held liable for
negligence Essential elements

Duty and standard of duty, causation injury care, breach of & damage

Negligence

Deviation from accepted or expected standards of care expected to protect from
unreasonable risk of harm or the failure to use the care/skills that any care giver in the
same/similar situation would be expected to do

Occurs when there is duty care

Carelessness assumes the legal quality of negligence

Malpractice

Professional negligence when the conduct fails to meet the legal standard of care and
someone is damaged as a result Law has developed a measuring scale called standard of
care
                                          857
Malpractice

Standard of care – the expected care, skill, & judgment under similar circumstances by
a similarly trained, reasonable nurse or what a reasonably prudent person acting under
similar would do

Elements of negligence

Failure to meet the standards of due care Any harm resulting from failure to meet the
standard Breach of this standard causes an injury to the patient Abandonment of patients
under your care •Failure to observe & take appropriate action Leaving patients
unattended /refusing to attend to a patient Elements of negligence

Injury sustained to a patient under your care Damage -Derived from harm or injury
Nosocomial infection- meaning that there is no proper measure of infection control

Loss of patients property/documents •Documentation: Omission & Commission

Wrongful death - patient dies because of negligence of health care organization or health
care professionals mistakes

Elements required to prove negligence Duty of Care (Duty to Act)

Duty of care to the patient (Nurses assume a duty to provide care for the patient which
is consistent with the standard of Care)

Knowledge of the case & management so as to provide reasonable care - need to
collaborate with other professionals

Consideration of professional ethics Elements required to prove negligence Breach of
Duty

Failure to perform to the standard or failure to act consistently with applicable standard
of care leading to injury and damages Damages

Actual loss which occurred or harm Medical-legal cases

Is any case where the discipline of medicine comes to help the legal fraternity in its
discharge of duties

Interface of dimensional perplexing medicine & can be & law is multi quite complex &

H/Care professionals need to be very cautious in dealing with the medico- legal cases
                                          858
Medical-legal cases

Request of the patient, relatives or friend for not registering the case as medico-legal
should not be accepted

Medico-legal case should be registered as soon as the Dr. suspects foul play or case
brought several days after the incident

Example of medical legal cases

All cases of injuries

All cases of burns

Alleged cases of assault

All cases of suspected or evident of poisoning or intoxication

Cases of unconscious/comatose where its cause is not natural or not clear

Cases of suspected self-inflicted injuries or attempted suicide

End of life issues

Life sustaining measures

 Cardio-pulmonary resuscitation (CPR) - When to stop mechanical ventilation uEnd-of-
life decisions

With-holding or Withdrawing Treatment

Do not resuscitate (DNR) – Euthanasia

End of life issues

Pt must be made aware about their rights to: u Initiate directives & encouraged to do so

Consent or refuse Rx

Discussions regarding advance directives/end - of-life issues should be:-

made as early as possible before death is imminent

                                          859
Not be made in hospital setting to allow more time for discussion, processing & decision
making

Advance directives

Communication that specifies a person’s preference about medical care in the event that
person becomes incapacitated

Includes

Do not resuscitate(DNR)order

The pt. or surrogate has given clear directives not to resuscitate the pt. in event of
cardiopulmonary arrest

Advance directives

There should be discussions, broad consultation and accurate documentation that reflect
discussions between family and members of the critical care team and any subsequent
decisions.

Any directives those involved

should be clear to all in patients care

Advance directives

Do not resuscitate(DNR)order cont´d

The order is clearly written in the pt.’s records by physicians so that misunderstanding
do not occur It must meet the facility’s policy Allow-a-natural deathIn what situations
should CPR be used?Done to patients with irreversible or terminal illness

Advance directives

Do not resuscitate(DNR)order cont´d uHow long should efforts continue?

A generally accepted Position is that resuscitation should cease if the physician
determines the efforts to be futile or hopeless

Advance directives

Living will
                                          860
Provide mechanisms in which an individual can allow which specific Rx to be withheld
in an event they become incapacitated

May not always be legally binding uCan be changed from time to time

Advance directives

Health care proxy or surrogate/durable power of attorney for health care

Pt legally designate a person whom they trust to make decisions on their behave should
they become incapacitated

Protects pt.’s interest medically than a living will

End of life decisions

End-of-life decisions are often difficult & are best made after careful discussions
between the H/Care professional & the patient (or the legal next of kin)

End of life decisions

Withholding or withdrawal of treatment

This involves the withholding or withdrawal of multiple life sustaining therapies

Withholding" refers to not initiating treatment, whereas “withdrawing "refers to stopping
treatment once started

End of life decisions

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments Withdrawing of life support is ethically
acceptable and clinically desirable if it reduces the unnecessary suffering in patients
whose life is considered hopeless and any treatment given is futile e.g. withdrawing of
ventilation support, ionotropic drugs etc.

Withdrawing Tx for sound moral reasons does not violate professional obligations;
however H/Care professionals may find it emotionally difficult to withdraw Tx

End of life decisions

The nurse ensures that the patient/legal next of kin understands the information by
clarifying technical terms & helping the patient/next of kin weigh treatment options

                                           861
End of life decisions

Euthanasia t's illegal Has primary intention of intervention e.g. giving a lethal injection
to cause death,Can be tested in court



Assignment 2

Discuss the differences between the following terms

1. Tort

2. Libel vs Assault vs slender

3. Breach of contract vs absconding duty 4. Negligence vs malpractice

EMPLOYMENT ACT CHAPTER 226



EMPLOYMENT RELATIONSHIP



Contracts Contract of service

No person shall be employed under a contract of service except in accordance with the
provisions of this Act. Oral and written contracts

The provisions of this Act shall apply to oral and written contracts.

General provision of contract of service A contract of service—

(a) for a period or a number of working days which amount in the

aggregate to the equivalent, of three months or more; or

(b) which provides for the performance of any specified work which could not
reasonably be expected to be completed within a period or a number of working days
amounting in the aggregate to the equivalent of three months,shall be in writing.

Employment particulars
                                          862
(1) A written contract of service specified in section 9 shall state particulars

of employment which may, subject to subsection (3), be given in instalments and

shall be given not later than two months after the beginning of the employment.

(2) A written contract of service shall state—

(a) the name, age, permanent address and sex of the employee; (b) the name of the
employer;

(c) the job description of the employment;

(d) the date of commencement of the employment; (e) the form and duration of the
contract;

(f) the place of work; (g) the hours of work;

(h) the remuneration, scale or rate of remuneration, the method of calculating that
remuneration and details of any other benefits;

(i) the intervals at which remuneration is paid; and

(j) the date on which the employee’s period of continuous employment began, taking
into account any employment with a previous employer which counts towards that
period; and

(k) any other prescribed matter.

Payment, disposal and recovery of wages, allowances,

(1) Subject to this Act, an employer shall pay the entire amount of the wages

earned by or payable to an employee in respect of work done by the employee in

pursuance of a contract of service directly, in the currency of Kenya— (a) in cash(b) into
an account at a bank, or building society, designated by the employee;

(c) by cheque, postal order or money order in favor of the employee; or

Payment ctt..

(1) In the absence of an employee, to a person other than the employee,
                                           863
if the person is duly authorized by the employee in writing to receive the wages on the
employee’s behalf.(2) An employer shall pay wages to an employee on a working day,
and during

working hours, at or near to the place of employment or at such other place as may

be agreed between the employer and the employee.

(3) An employer shall not pay wages to an employee in any place where intoxicating
liquor is sold or readily available for supply, except in the case of employees employed
to work in that place.

(4) No person shall give or promise to any person any advance of money or any valuable
consideration upon a condition expressed or implied that the personor any dependent of
that person shall enter upon any employment.

Sexual harassment

An employee is sexually harassed if the employer of that employee or a representative
of that employer or a co-worker—

(a) directly or indirectly requests that employee for sexual intercourse, sexual contact or
any other form of sexual activity that contains an implied or express—

promise of preferential treatment in employment; threat of detrimental treatment in
employment; or threat about the present or future employment status of the employee;

(b) uses language whether written or spoken of a sexual nature; (c) uses visual material
of a sexual nature; or

(d) shows physical behavior of a sexual nature which directly or indirectly subjects the
employee to behavior that is unwelcome or offensive to that employee and that by its
nature has a detrimental effect on that employee’s employment, job performance, or job
satisfaction.

Sexual harassment policy i. that every employee is entitled to employment that is free of

ii. sexual harassment;

iii. that the employer shall take steps to ensure that no employee is subjected to sexual
harassment;


                                          864
iv. that the employer shall take such disciplinary measures as the employer deems
appropriate against any person under the employer’s direction, who subjects any
employee to sexual harassment;

v. explaining how complaints of sexual harassment may be brought to the attention of
the employer; and that the employer will not disclose the name of a complainant or the
circumstances related to the complaint to any person except where disclosure is
necessary for the purpose of

vi. investigating the complaint or taking disciplinary measures in relation thereto.

Leave 1. Annual Leave

According to section 28 of the Kenyan Employment Act, every employee is entitled to
Annual leave days after every 12 consecutive months of service with full pay. As an
employer, you can divide these 21 leave days in intervals with the consent of your
employee.

2. Sick Leave

Section 30 of the employment ACT highlights that an employee who has worked for you
for 2 consecutive months is entitled to sick leave of not less than seven days with full
pay.

3. The maternity /Paternity leave



Further Section 29 of the ACT says that a female employee is entitled to 3 months
maternity leave with full pay after which she also has a right to return to her job or with
better terms than what she had before she left for the maternity leave. Clause 8 of section
29 provides that male employees are as well entitled to two weeks paternity leave with
full pay.

4. Compassionate leave

Compassionate leave in Kenya allows an employee to attend to his/her misfortunes
which are usually not planned for and may occur at any point in time including death,
sickness or accidents of relatives and friends.

5. Compulsory Leave


                                          865
Compulsory leave is an administrative leave imposed on an employee by the employer
normally to pave way for investigations into possible employment offences which may
ultimately lead to commencement of disciplinary proceedings.

6. Leave of absence

Upon request, other employers in Kenya allow their employees to unpaid leave of
absence from work for a period of time depending on the organization.

Identification and reporting of faulty Operation Theatre apparatus

MANAGING SURGICAL INSTRUMENTS IS A TEAM EFFORT

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

Perioperative personnel and processing personnel must WORK TOgETHER

to ensure the effective management of surgical instruments.Effective Management of
Surgical Instruments

PURPOSE STATEMENT

The purpose of this educational activity is to demonstrate proper management of surgical
instruments and to emphasize that effective communication between perioperative and
instrument processing personnel is essential to ensure that instruments used in surgical
and other invasive procedures facilitate safe and effective patient outcomes.

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments



PATIENT SAFETY

•    Optimal surgical outcome.

•    Reduced complications related to tissue damage.

•    Reduced incidence of infection.

•    Reduced recuperation time

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

                                         866
REDUCED EXPENSES

•   Reduce patient length of stay.

•   Reduce expenses related to hospital-associated infection.

•   Reduce expenses related to complications.

•   Extend instrument life.

•   Reduce replacement costs.

–   A major cause of instrument damage is mishandling and abuse.

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

Instrument management

Begins in the Operating ROOM at the point of instruments

DURING THE PROCEDURE

Instruments must be

INSPECTED BEFORE use on the field.

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

Any DEFECTIVE OR MISSINg INSTRUMENTS must be CLEARLY IDENTIFIED
for SPD or the instrument technician in ambulatory surgery.Effective Management of
Surgical Instruments

HANDLING

•      Handle instruments carefully and ONE AT A TIME or in SMALL NUMBERS.

•      Use instruments ONLY for the purpose for which they were intended

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

•     Use scissors only for the MATERIAL FOR WHICH THEY WERE DESIgNED.



                                       867
Cutting other materials can cause misalignment, loss of sharpness, damage (e.g. Use
Mayo scissors, not Metzenbaums or more delicate scissors to cut drapes and material
other than tissue).

•Use sharp instruments (diamond knives, cystotomes, dissectors, knives) ONLY FOR
THEIR INTENDED USE.

Misuse can cause blades and edges to dull and impair surgical performance.

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

~      Use forceps APPROPRIATE TO THE TASK at hand

Improper alignment can create serious problems with function and harm to the patient

•        MATCH NEEDLE HOLDERS TO THE SIZE OF NEEDLE for which it is
intended

–Large needles will spring the jaws of delicate needle holders and reduce holding power

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

•      During the procedure, wipe blood and tissue from instruments

IMMEDIATELY AFTER USE.

Debris that is allowed to dry on instruments causes deterioration, corrosion, and pitting.

Saline solution may be be used to wipe instruments that will be used again during the
procedure.

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

•       PROTECT TIPS of instruments with tip protectors.

Prevent tips of instruments from contacting other instruments and snagging on towels
and sponges

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

FOLLOWING THE PROCEDURE

•     Remove disposable sharps; manage sharps appropriately.
                                          868
Effective Management of Surgical Instrument

PREPARE THE INSTRUMENTS

•        Open box locks.

Insure that all multipart instruments are DISASSEMBLED.

KEEP PARTS TOgETHER for easy reassembly after processing

EXPOSE all surfaces

Cleaning, disinfectants, and sterilants must

CONTACT ALL SURFACES of an instrument for the process to be effective



Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

•        All cannulated equipment and handpieces should be FLUSHED

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

    Organize instruments into sets.

–      All instruments, used and unused, go back into the set.

–      Once opened onto the sterile field, the entire set is considered contaminated.

•      Place HEAVY INSTRUMENTS ON THE BOTTOM; lighter instruments on top.

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

•      Clearly identify deficient/missing instruments.

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments



•      CONTAIN CONTAMINATED instruments to protect personnel.

•      DO NOT ALLOW BLOOD AND DEBRIS TO DRY on instruments.
                                           869
–    Soak in demineralized water to prevent drying of bioburden.

–    Saline, disinfectants, and chlorinated solutions can cause pitting and corrosion and
should never be used for soaking instruments.

•    Transport instruments to SPD as quickly as possible.

–    Instruments should not remain in water for lengthy periods of time.

–    Biofilms may form, particularly within lumens.



Effective Management of Surgical Instruments



BIOFILM

•    An aggregate of organisms encased within a gelatinous matrix.

–    Biofilm is the SLIMY FEELINg on the inside of a container that has held water for
a period of time.

–   Once formed, a biofilm CANNOT BE RINSED AWAY; it can only be removed
by mechanical means.

•    The presence of a biofilm makes cleaning more difficult.

–    Biofilm can pose a SERIOUS THREAT TO HEALTH.

–  Biofilm CAN COMPROMISE THE DISINFECTION AND STERILIZATION
PROCESSES

A biofilm CAN BREAK FREE from the surface of a device resulting in a MASSIVE
INFUSION OF BACTERIA that can cause an infection that is difficult to treat.

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

•    Cleaning is the FIRST AND MOST IMPORTANT STEP in instrument processing.

•    An instrument must be clean before it can be sterilized.

                                         870
–   Debris prevents sterilant from contacting all surfaces of an instrument.

–   Improper cleaning of instruments can cause harm to patients.

AN INSTRUMENT CAN BE CLEAN BUT NOT STERILE; NO INSTRUMENT CAN
BE STERILE BUT NOT CLEAN.

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

STERILE PROCESSING RESPONSIBILITIES

•   Cleaning/ Decontamination

–   Wash

–   Rinse

•   Lubrication

•   Inspection and Testing

–   Continue Reprocessing

–   Send for Repair/Discard

•   Prepare for sterilization

•   Sterilization

•   Storage

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

TOXIC ANTERIOR SEGMENT SYNDROME (TASS)

•    An ACUTE INFLAMMATION of the anterior chamber, or segment, of the eye
following cataract surgery.

•     Can be caused by INADEQUATE OR INAPPROPRIATE CLEANINg of
instruments leaving irritants on the surface of intraocular surgical instruments.




                                        871
Effective Management of Surgical Instrument

TOXIC ANTERIOR SEGMENT SYNDROME (TASS) (CONT.)

•    Risks may be associated with the use of enzymatic cleaners.

–    INCOMPLETE RINSINg, especially of cannulated instruments, has been
identified with TASS.

•  Chemical sterilization methods such as EtO and peracetic acid may leave
CHEMICAL RESIDUES on the instruments that promote TASS

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

MANUAL CLEANING

•    HAND WASH microsurgical instruments and trays.

•    Remove mats from trays and CLEAN EACH SEPARATELY.

•  Do not put delicate microsurgical instruments in mechanical washer unless it has a
DELICATE CYCLE.

Effective Management of Surgical Instrument

•    OPEN ALL HINgED microsurgical instruments for maximum exposure of hinges.

•  Debris left in box locks or crevices can be baked on in sterilization, causing future
BREAKAgE UNDER STRESS.

•    DISASSEMBLE instruments with removable parts Effective Management of
Surgical Instruments

•    Wash each instrument individually to ensure proper cleaning and to prevent injury.

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

•   Do not use abrasive cleaners when cleaning microsurgical instruments; they can
damage or scar finishes.

•    Use soft brush and instruments wipes.

–    Brush all serrations, crevices, tips, handles, and hinges.
                                          872
–    Brushing should be done under the surface of the water to prevent aerosolization of
contaminants.

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

CANNULATED INSTRUMENTS

•    Cannulas, irrigation cannulas, irrigation/aspiration (I/A) handpieces, suction tips,
cystotomes.

•   Use a brush of the appropriate size to clean the lumen; hold instrument and brush
below the water surface.

–    Clean and sterilize the brush DAILY or according to the manufacturer’s directions.

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

CANNULATED INSTRUMENTS (CONT.)

•    Flush lumens using a syringe filled with warm distilled or deionized water
according to the manufacturer’s directions.

•    Flush below the surface of the water to avoid aerosolizing contaminant

Effective Management of Surgical Instrument

ANNULATED INSTRUMENTS (CONT.)

•    Follow rinse with air dry.

–    50cc syringe filled with air.

–    Compressed air

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

AUTOMATED CLEANING / MECHANICAL WASHING

•    A washer-decontaminator can be used to mechanically wash sturdier instruments
in an agitated detergent bath.

•    Use detergent with NEUTRAL PH.

                                         873
–   Follow the recommendations of both the manufacturer of the detergent and the
manufacturer of the instrument.

Effective Management of Surgical Instrument

AUTOMATED CLEANING / MECHANICAL WASHING (CONT.)

•    Place heavy instruments in the bottom of the tray or basket.

•    Load small or light instruments in separate trays.

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

AUTOMATED CLEANING / MECHANICAL WASHING (CONT.)

•  Do not put microsurgical instruments into a washer decontaminator unless it has a
DELICATE CYCLE.

•    Do not put powered or lensed instruments into a washer decontaminator unless

recommended by the instrument manufacturer.

•    Do not use a washer decontaminator

for heat, moisture, or pressure-sensitive instruments.

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments



MECHANICAL CLEANING WITH HARD WATER

•    Mineral deposits will accumulate on the walls of equipment after repeated use.

•    Clean equipment regularly to remove impurities and scale.

•   Water purifying system or softening agent added before each use minimizes
formation of scum, scale, and discoloration.



Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

                                          874
PREPARE THE INSTRUMENTS

•    Just as in the OR, SPD personnel must insure that

–    Box locks are open

–    All multipart instruments are disassembled

‘–   All instruments in a set are together

–    All surfaces are exposed so that disinfectants and sterilants can reach ALL surfaces

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments



PREPARE THE INSTRUMENTS (CONT.)

•    Protect sharp instruments

–    Sharp tips and sharp edges are easily dulled or broken.

•    Protect personnel from injury from sharp instruments.

–    Don’t bury sharp instruments among other instruments.

–    They should be readily visible to avoid injury when handling.

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments



ULTRASONIC CLEANING

•    Ultrasonic cleaners use high frequency sound waves to create mechanical vibration.

•   Cavitation: microscopic bubbles form on every surface, then implode, creating a
vacuum which pulls particles from every crevice of the instrument.

•    Ultrasound penetrates areas that a brush or mechanical washer cannot reach.

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments


                                             875
•   Use detergent at the proper concentration and temperature, recommended by the
manufacturer.

•   Ultrasound for 5 minutes or according to the manufacturer’s directions.

•   The ultrasound machine should be drained and cleaned/disinfected frequently.

–   Frequency of cleaning is based on the amount of use.

–   Frequency can be as often as every 1-2 hours or after every use.



Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

•   Sort instruments into batches, separated by metal composition.

•   Never place different metals in ultrasonic cleaner at the same time.

•   Stainless steel and titanium instruments must be cleaned separately.

•  Mixing incompatible metals can             CAUSE     PITTINg,     ETCHINg,   AND
DEgRADATION of surface treatments.



Effective Management of Surgical Instruments



ULTRASONIC CLEANING (CONT.)

•   Powered instruments should be not cleaned in an ultrasonic washer.

•    A NEUTRAL PH ultrasound solution is also vital to protect the passivation layer
on instruments and prevent corrosion.

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments



ULTRASONIC CLEANING (CONT.)

                                        876
•   PROTECT tips, cutting edges and box lock from other instruments.

–     Ultrasonic vibration can cause premature wear whe instruments contact adjacent
instruments.

•    Rinse instruments thoroughly with DISTILL WATER after the cycle to remove
residue and particles from surfaces and to preve staining



Effective Management of Surgical Instrument



ULTRASONIC CLEANING (CONT.)

•   CHECK SCREWS on instruments, as vibration may loosen screws.

•   Instruments should be AIR DRIED with filtered, compressed air.

•   USE HOT AIR DRYER.

•   Avoid canned, compressed air due to particulates.

–   Protect fine tips and edges which can be damaged when snagged on gauze or towel.

•   If drying with a towel, the towel should be LINT-FREE

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments



•     Lubrication helps prevent staining, rusting and corrosion (if specified by the
instrument manufacturer).

•   Lubrication promotes smooth action of hinged instruments

•    Proper lubrication helps to keep instruments clean by preventing mineral and
protein build up.

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

•   Lubricate only instruments with mechanical parts.
                                       877
•    Use a water-soluble, anti-microbial lubricant after each cleaning, or a minimum of
once each day.

•    Water soluble lubricant penetrates the box locks, hinges and crevices, preventing
binding and excessive wear.

•    Do not lubricate cannulated instrument



Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

•    Follow the manufacturer’s instructions for lubrication.

–    Place instruments individually in a perforated tray; do not allow instruments to
touch one another. Immerse the open perforated tray in the lubricant.

–    30-40 seconds is the usual immersion time.

•    Replace the lubricant at least daily to keep it clean.

•    DO NOT USE SILICONE SPRAYS or other oils which can build up in hinges and
crevices and inhibit sterilization.

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

•    Let the instruments drain.

•    Do not rinse or wipe the instruments.

•    Some lubricant will be removed during ultrasonic cleaning.

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

•    Lubricant film should remain on instruments through the sterilization process.

–    Though much of the lubricant is removed during preparation and sterilization, the
lubricant that remains provides surface protection

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

INSPECTING AND TESTING

                                          878
•    Magnified visual and mechanical inspection is a CRUCIAL STEP in the processing
of instruments.

•    Each instrument is inspected following the lubricant bath.

–    Misalignment, malfunction, dull edges or points on sharp instruments, bent tips,
loose screws, pits, nicks, cracks, corrosion, etc.

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments



INSPECTING AND TESTING (CONT.)

•    Damaged instruments are SET ASIDE for further evaluation, repair, or
replacement.

–    Damaged instruments must never be put into sets.

–  A set should not be processed until the damaged instrument has been replaced;
INCOMPLETE

SETS CAN CAUSE DELAYS IN SURGERY

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

INSPECTING AND TESTING (CONT.)

•    The instrument finish should have no dull spots, dents, nicks, or cracks.

•    Incompletely cleaned instruments must be reprocessed.

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

INSPECTING AND TESTING (CONT.)

•    Sharp instruments (scissors, rongeurs, osteotomes, curettes, knives, etc.) should be
tested for sharpness and smooth cutting under magnification.

•    Hinged instruments should work smoothly without stiffness.

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

                                         879
FORCEPS

•    Jaws that overlap when tightly closed are out of alignment.

•    Teeth of forceps must mesh properly.

•    Tying platforms must meet evenly over the full length to eliminate damage to fine
sutures.



Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

•    Hold the ring handles in both hands, open the instrument, wiggle the instrument to
identify excessive play in the box lock.

–    Excessive play indicates alignment problems or wear.

–    Instrument may not hold securely.

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

RATCHET

•    TEST TENSION by closing the instrument gently; when jaws touch, a space of
1/16” or 1/8” should occur between the ratchet teeth of each shank.

•    Close ratchet to first tooth.

•    Hold instrument by jaws and tap against your hand.

•    If instrument springs open, it is an indication of defective ratchet teeth or poor shank
tension.

–    The instrument will not hold tissue, sponges, or needles securely



Effective Management of Surgical Instruments



SCISSORS
                                           880
•    When closed, scissor should meet only at tips.

•    All scissors should operate smoothly.

–    Rough operation implies wear, damage, or failure.

•    Look for burrs on blade tips.

•    Scissors with nicks in the blades should be identified and tagged for repair.

•    Shanks should be in good alignment; if not, the blades may not close smoothly.

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments



•   Many facilities use Theraband (the same latex product that is used for exercise
bands) to test the sharpness of Mayo and Metzenbaum scissors.

–    There are two thicknesses; one for scissors with blades longer than 5 inches and
one for scissors with blades less than 5 inches



Effective Management of Surgical Instruments



NEEDLE HOLDERS

•            A needle should be held firmly in place when the needle holder is closed to
the lock or stop.

•    If the needle can be twisted or rotated, the needle holder needs repair.

•    If light can be observed between jaws that are closed and/or locked, the jaws are
sprung or damaged and will require repair

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments



RONGEURS
                                          881
  •     The cutting edges of a rongeur must be SHARP.

  •     A sharp Kerrison rongeur should take a clean bite out of a 3x5 index card.

  •     Bone-cutting rongeurs should bite through a tongue depressor.

  •     There are commercially available sharpness test kits and standards for surgical
  instruments.

  Effective Management of Surgical Instrument

  •     Instruments are assembled and placed into containers for sterilization.

  •     All surfaces of each instrument must be exposed to sterilant.



      Learning outcome 2: Perform Perioperative Theatre Technical services

  Introduction to the learning outcome

  Upon completion of this unit describes the knowledge, skills and attitudes required to
  adjustment of operating table, anesthetic machines and their operation,Suction machine
  and its operation, Diathermy machine and its operation,Lighting in operation
  theatre,Endoscopy/colonoscopy machine and their operation,Scopes and their
  operationand Operation Theatre accessories and appliances and their us

  Performance Standard
       1.   Operation table is adjusted according to the procedure to be carried out.
       2.   Anaesthetic machine is operated as per user manual
       3.   Suction machine is connected as per user manual
       4.   Diathermy machine is set as per user manual
       5.   Operation lights are set as per procedure to be done
       6.   Accessories and appliances are set as per the procedure to be carried out



Information sheet

Adjustment of operating table




                                               882
The electro hydraulic operating table that has a lift capacity of 1,000 pounds. In fact, this
operating table can be lowered to just 24 inches off the floor in order to accommodate
surgeons who are seated during lengthy operations.

Additionally, the table can be equipped with a 180 degree rotating table top for patient
imaging access and offers:

   1. Chest plate adjustment
   2. Back plate adjustment

                                           883
   3.   Head plate adjustment
   4.   Leg plate adjustment
   5.   Longitudinal shift
   6.   Other flex positioning




Anaesthetic machines and their operation




Describe the preparation of an anesthetic machine and anesthetic for a patient with
known malignant hypothermia susceptibility

Clean the anesthetic machine; remove vaporizers; and replace CO2 absorbant, bellows,
and gas hose. Flush the machine for 20 minutes with 10 L/min of oxygen. Have the MH
cart in the operating room? Schedule the patient for the first case of the day and notify
the postanesthetic care unit to be prepared with an appropriate number of personnel. A
cooling blanket should be placed under the patient. Refrigerated saline should be
available. A no triggering anesthetic technique such as continuous intravenous infusion
of propofol should be used. The patient should be monitored for 6 to 8 hours after
surgery.

Suction machine and its operation

In surgery, suction is used to remove blood, saliva, other biological material and foreign
detritus from an anatomical passage or from a working field. A suction-irrigator can
simultaneously perfuse and collect a saline solution where washing is required.




                                          884
Suction is indispensable to clear the airway of blood, mucous, vomitus or other
obstructing material. Consequently, suction machines can be found in emergency rooms,
ambulances, patient wards and cafeterias.



A central vacuum pump connected to a building-wide network of suction plumbing is
termed a "house vacuum". This is an efficient alternative to multiple small machines
distributed throughout the building. Nevertheless the individual machines are necessary
for mobile use and for backup during failure of a house vacuum.




Fluid Flow Path

filter Fluid Flow Path[edit]
                                  Liq
                                                         Va
 Inle      Su         Coll        uid        Va                     Va          Ex
                                                         cuu
 t         cti        ecti        blo        cu                     cu          ha
                                                         m
 acc     ⟶ on       ⟶ on        ⟶ cki      ⟶ um        ⟶          ⟶ um        ⟶ ust
                                                         reg
 ess       tu         vess        ng         ga                     pu          filt
                                                         ulat
 ory       be         el          dev        ge                     mp          er
                                                         or
                                  ice




                                        885
Disinfecting Your Portable Suction Unit

It is best to follow the manufacturer's guidelines when disinfecting your suction unit, but
in general, the following steps apply:




Disconnect the unit from its power source. Disconnect the battery from the PC board
when cleaning the interior chassis.

Discard all disposable parts, including the canister, tubing, and catheters. Dispose
biohazardous materials appropriately.

Use a mild detergent or a mixture of bleach and water (1-part bleach/10 parts water) and
rinse thoroughly.

Follow the instruction manual when disinfecting the mechanics of the unit.

Never submerge the suction unit. Use disinfectant wipes to clean all outer surfaces,
including control knobs, screens and handles.



Don't wait for the end of your shift to disinfect the suction unit. Do it immediately after
each call to ensure it is clean and operational for the next patient.

                                          886
Don't Forget About Power

Keeping your suction unit functional means ensuring it always has a reliable power
source. The unit is of no use if the batteries are dead. Here are our recommendations:



Check the batteries at the start of each shift.

Test the batteries periodically, per manufacturer’s guidelines.

Replace worn or damaged batteries.

Have plenty of backups on hand, especially for MCIs.

Practice Makes Perfect

Proper maintenance is important, but so is proper training. Here are some ideas for
honing your suction skills:

Incorporate suction technique into code practice scenarios.

Review airway anatomy to maximize suction technique.Know the key differences
between paediatric suction techniques.

Review the dangers and complications associated with improper suctioning.

Be aware of variations in suction catheter size/style and their appropriateness per patient.



Keeping the Unit Safe

Finally, to ensure your portable suction unit is ready for the next airway emergency, it is
important to protect it from damage. This includes:



Avoiding extreme temperatures Keeping the suction unit away from wet or high moisture
areas

                                           887
Securing the unit within your rig to prevent damage while responding Keeping the unit
free of dust and debris

Knowing how to properly clean your portable suction unit is only part of maintaining its
overall health. Practice these recommendations to maximize your unit's efficiency and
effectiveness.

Diathermy machine and its operation

Diathermy is the use of high frequency alternate polarity radio-wave electrical current to
cut or coagulate tissue during surgery. It allows for precise incisions to be made with
limited blood loss and is now used in nearly all surgical disciplines.

Diathermy uses high-frequency electric current to produce heat deep inside a targeted
tissue. ... Instead, the waves generated by the machine allow the body to generate heat
from within the targeted tissue. Diathermy is usually part of a complete physical therapy
or rehabilitative regimen.JunDiathermy is the controlled production of "deep heating"
beneath the skin in the subcutaneous tissues, deep muscles and joints for therapeutic
purposes. There are basically two types of diathermy devices on the market today: radio
or high frequency and microwave

Microwave diathermy uses electromagnetic radiation by microwaves and heats to a
lesser tissue depth than short-wave diathermy. It is primarily used to heat superficial
muscles and joints such as the shoulder

There is one basic difference between bipolar and monopolar techniques. With
monopolar electrosurgery, a probe electrode is used to apply the electrosurgical energy
to the target tissue to achieve the desired surgical effect. ... With the bipolar
electrosurgical method a bipolar device, often a set of forceps, is used.

Surgical diathermy machine

In surgical diathermy, a high-frequency electric current (0.5—2 MHz) is used to

produce heat to seal (by coagulation) blood vessels, or to cut and seal at the same

time. The heating can be regulated by a variable resistance.

There are two types of diathermy machine: monopolar and bipolar.

In monopolar machines, the current flows from the active electrode through body


                                          888
tissue, along the line of least resistance, to a large indifferent plate electrode and



MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF LABORATO R Y AND HOSPITAL EQUIPM ENT

Different waveforms can be used to produce a cutting or coagulating mode. For the
cutting mode, the waveform is continuous, while for the coagulating mode, the energy
is produced in bursts.

With bipolar diathermy, the two tips of a pair of forceps are the two electrodes;

there is no plate electrode. Coagulation occurs when the forceps are closed across a

piece of tissue. This technique is very good for dealing with very small blood

vessels. The energy output required is low.

Diathermy machines can be classified according to the type of output connection

used.

Isolated output machines have both sides of the output floating with respect to

earth. This minimizes the risk of possible alternative pathways for radiofrequency

current (which can cause burns), or for mains frequency current from the machine

itself (which can electrocute).

Radiofrequency earthed output machines have a capacitor placed between the

plate side of the output and earth. This permits radiofrequency current to flow to

earth. The small value of the capacitor prevents the passage of mains frequency

current so that isolation is effectively preserved at the mains frequency; the risks of

electrocution are not increased by this method. However, the risk of possible

alternative pathways for radiofrequency current to cause burns is greatly increased

and for this reason a plate current monitor is required on such machines. This
                                           889
monitor senses any difference in current flows between the active and the plate

leads, and turns off the output if a difference occurs. The difference represents the

leakage current.

Hard-earthed output machines have a plate electrode directly connected to earth,

so, the patient is also directly connected to earth. This means that the risk of

electrocution is very much higher. For this reason, machines of this design are no

longer produced, and any that are still in use should be replaced.

Maintenance

The routine maintenance needed for these machines is limited. Proper records

should be kept of all work done on them. Make a check-sheet of work to be done,

and then make routine inspections at least twice a year. The most important job is the
electrical safety check. If you do not have an electrical safety checker, follow the
instructions in the section on cardiac monitors

Keep the inside and the outside of the machine clean. Check the plate electrodes, the
leads, and the instruments. Most of the problems will be caused by faulty leads, and in
many cases, you should be able to repair these yourself. The instruments (e.g., diathermy
forceps) are unlikely to give problems, provided that they are checked after each
sterilization.




                                           890
•    Lighting in operation theatre




Operating lights are a necessary component of any operating theatre or surgical suite and
are available in a variety of different configurations, wattage amounts and features.
Avante carries a wide selection of surgery lights including both large, ceiling-mounted
operating room lights and small, portable exam lights. In recent years, older halogen
lights have been replaced by brighter, more energy-efficient LED options. LED surgery
lights last longer than traditional incandescent versions and often incorporate LCD
touchscreens to adjust illumination and spotlight settings.




                                         891
Repairs, maintenance and medical equipment planning is best delivered by a company
who specializes in the up time of operating room service and support within surgical
centres. Operating rooms are specifically designed for surgeons and surgical staff to
perform surgical procedures that require time, patience, focus, and safety. Various pieces
of equipment are required for use in the operating room. Let ERD be your professional
medical equipment planner, they are vendor neutral.

Surgical Lights – High-quality surgical lighting is essential for performing intricate
procedures in the operating room. Surgical lights are designed to provide bright white
light to illuminate the surgical site and eliminate shadows, all while keeping the surgical
staff cool. LED lights or halogen lights are two types of surgical lights. Surgical lighting
is transitioning away from incandescent technology to LED technology due to the many
benefits of LED: pure white colour, less heat in the surgical field, more accurate colour
rendition, and improved shadow control. Recommended maintenance is 2x per year.




                                          892
•    Endoscopy/colonoscopy machine and their operation

What is endoscopy?

Endoscopy is a procedure in which the gastro-intestinal tract (GI tract) is viewed through
a lighted, flexible tube with a camera at the end (endoscope). Small samples of tissues
cells (biopsy) can also be collected and sent for testing.




                                          893
In Procedure rooms a clean to dirty workflow must be maintained. The clean area will
include

sterile supplies and a write-up space with computer and printer to generate endoscopy
reports.

The room may be purpose designed to accommodate the following:

endoscopy 'stack' and video monitor(s) – this equipment contains the light source and
video processor required for the endoscopes to produce images

endoscope cabinet with clean endoscopes and accessory equipment such as endoscopy
biopsy forceps, snares, injectors

monitoring equipment to allow continuous monitoring of patient condition during
procedures

anaesthetic equipment and medication used to provide procedural sedation or short
acting anaesthetics, diathermy and/or Argon plasma coagulation equipment

                                       894
 imaging equipment such as Image Intensifier or C- arm X-ray screening unit depending
on procedures to be performed; imaging equipment may be portable or installed in the
room.

Endoscopy Unit

International

Health Facility Guidelines

scope is wiped down and placed in a closed container and transported to the clean-up
area; if any

delay in processing is expected the scopes are soaked in an enzyme detergent solution.

Decontamination includes leak testing, manual pre-cleaning followed by high level
disinfection with

a disinfectant solution.

Endoscope reprocessing areas should be separate to Procedure/ Operating rooms and
unidirectional dirty to clean workflow must be maintained. A centralised reprocessing
area is recommended for efficient handling of endoscopes and appropriate air
pressurisation and ventilation. Cleaning and Disinfection areas must be negatively
pressured and ventilated to remove vapours of chemicals used in the process.

The Cleaning and Disinfection of equipment area will include:

sinks for soaking and rinsing sufficiently sized to prevent tight coiling of the endoscope
which may damage the fibre-optic cables in the instrument

ultrasonic cleaner for accessory equipment used in procedures

Automated endoscope cleaning/ disinfecting machines

compressed air to aid drying of endoscopic equipment after cleaning

handwashing basin

safety eyewash facility

stainless steel benches with space to accommodate the length of the endoscopes

                                          895
storage for disinfected scopes on a bench or shelf.

The Sterilising/Disinfection area will include an autoclave to sterilise accessory
instruments if a

sterile supply service is not available. Storage provisions will include adequately sized
areas for drugs, sterile stock, consumables, linen,

resuscitation trolley and mobile equipment which may include mobile imaging
equipment. Storage of sterile items and scopes close to the point of use is recommended.
Scope storage areas must

be positively pressured and HEPA filtered to prevent contamination of clean endoscopes.
Scopes

may be stored in properly ventilated and temperature-controlled cabinets, preferably a
passthrough type, located between reprocessing/ sterilising/disinfection areas and the
Operating/

Procedure room. Endoscope cabinets should allow for endoscopes to hang without
coiling

preventing damage to either end of the scope.



•    Scopes and their operation

Surgical scope




                                         896
An operating or surgical microscope is an optical instrument that provides the surgeon
with a stereoscopic, high quality magnified and illuminated image of the small structures
in the surgical area.

The optical components of a basic stereo microscope consist of the binocular head, a
magnification changer, the objective lens and an illuminator which beams light through
the objective lens and onto the operating field (Figures (Figures11 and and2).2). The
binocular head consists of two telescopes with adjustable eyepieces for users with
refractive error. The magnification can be changed by turning a knob (which selects
different magnification lenses) or by using a motorised zoom controlled by a foot pedal.



The working distance (Figure (Figure1)1) is the distance from the microscope objective
lens to the point of focus of the optical system. This value is fixed and is dependent on
the chosen focal length of the objective lens. The choice of working distance depends on
the type of surgery. For modern ophthalmic surgery that involves delicate work in the
posterior chamber, objective focal lengths of 150 mm, 175 mm and 200 mm are
commonly used.




The optical system often includes a beam splitter and a second set of teaching binoculars
(Figure (Figure2)2) so that two people can view the operation simultaneously.



The optical system is attached to the suspension arm of the floor stand (Figure
(Figure3).3). The suspension arm makes it possible to position the optics exactly and to
fix them in place. The floor stand has wheels and can be moved around the floor and
fixed into place using the brakes.



A foot pedal connected to the floor stand allows the surgeon to control the focus, the
zoom, the position of the optics over the eye (the x,y position on the horizontal plane)
and to turn the illumination on and off.




                                         897
The illumination system is usually housed in the floor stand in order to keep the bulb
heat away from the operating field. In this case, the light is transmitted to the operating
field by means of a fibre optic cable. The light in ophthalmic micro scopes is usually
coaxial, meaning that it follows the same path as the image in order to avoid shadows.

Procedures requiring scopes includes

Neurosurgery and Spine

Ophthalmology

Otolaryngology (ENT)

Dental

Plastic/Reconstructive Surgery




The surgical microscopes of Leica Microsystems are exactly geared to the requirements
of microsurgery. A compact optical unit delivers clear and sharply focused images and
the modular system gives the surgeon optimum maneuverability




Safety considerations When used in ophthalmology: • Avoid looking directly into the
light source, e.g. into the microscope objective lens or a light guide. Any kind of
radiation has a detrimental effect on biological tissue. This also applies to the light
illuminating the surgical field. • Reduce the brightness and duration of illumination on
the surgical field to the absolute minimum required. • When operating on the eye, always
use a protection filter to ensure that the patient's retina is not exposed to unnecessary
                                          898
(blue) radiation (retinal injury). dr. Chris R. Mol, BME, NORTEC, 2015 Operating
microscope • Stability of stand must be ensured • The system must be connected to a
special emergency backup line supply (in case of power failure)



•    Operation Theatre accessories and appliances and their use



operating room equipment list for operation theatre

By china care medical | 02 September 2018 | 11 Comments

Are you looking for operating theatre design guidelines for your new clinic or hopsital
operating room?

Do you want to get a operating room equipment list for operating room preparation for
surgery?

Do you know the difference between cardiac operation theatre equipment, orthopaedic
operating room, emergency operating room and other operating room equipment ?




                                        899
, Surgical Lamp Light

                        900
It has the wall mounted and Floor stand type, it shows the wall mounted type in the above
picture.

According to the light source principle. it has the LED, Apertured bulb type, the LED
types is always with longer working life, and brightness.

Bulb type is more cost efficient.

More other types with price, please click her2, x-ray machine

it is a kind of surgery x-ray machine, 2-1 is the control of the x-ray machine, 2-2 is the
main unit of the x-ray machine.

There are different types x-ray machine, from the portable type to stationary type.



3, Surgical table bed

It is used for the patient to sit and lie, it has different types, electric and manual types
and for different surgery type, it has different surgery table for different usage.

4, patient monitor

it is used for monitoring the patient conditions during surgery.

for adult and patriadic and pregnant patient, there are different types, also different
machine can monitor for different parameters, and different size screen of the machine,



5, Trolley

it is used for putting medicine, instruments and other useful items,

different size and different styles also different material will be influenced the price,




                                           901
6, Anaesthesia machine

it is used for anaesthesia patient during the surgery,



7, Infusion pump

it is used for infusion patient automated even when patient is without awareness. some
models can be with drug input functions,

8, Pendant

                                           902
  It is used for put patient monitor, endoscope and other surgery items during the surgery.

  there is also other commonly used equipment used for surgery room.

  Suction machine,

  Blood Warmer,

  Defibrillator,

  ECG Machine,

  Electrosurgical Unit,

  Loupe,

  Oxygen Generator,

  Suction Machine,

  Surgery Saw and Drills,

  Ventilator machine,

Learning outcome 3: Evaluate Perioperative Theatre Technical services

  Introduction to the learning outcome

  Upon completion of this unit describes the knowledge, skills and attitudes required to
  Operation Theatre maintenance procedures, Referral of faulty equipment and apparatus
  and Monitoring and evaluation in Operation Theatre.
  Performance Standard
      1. Faults committed are identified and rectified or referred as per workplace procedure
      2. Faulty equipment and apparatus are identified and reported to appropriate personnel




  Definition of terms

  Quality improvement

  The OT nurse needs to have enough knowledge on the various instruments for
  performing risk assessments. To be able to view quality work from an overall
                                            903
perspective, the OT nurse needs knowledge of quality improvement (QI) on an
organizational and health system level, such as set goals for the care of the intraoperative
patient and guidelines from different professional organizations (Spruce, 2015).

The aim of QI projects is to determine whether the appropriate standards of care are
reached in a specific clinical setting and in relation to an acceptable standard (Baker et
al., 2014). The focus is placed on systems, at local and organizational levels and not on
individuals. It is an internal procedure to cyclically evaluate work processes, which
include EBP, clinical effectiveness, evidence‐based clinical guidelines and audit
(Rycroft‐Malone et al., 2002). QI projects usually do not have theoretical underpinnings;
they most commonly do not aim to generate new knowledge and are not generalizable
to all settings (Baker, 2017; Cepero, 2011; Raines, 2012).

The foundation of nursing practice has three components that are closely related to each
other, but with different purposes, QI, EBP and nursing research. QI aims to improve
processes, EBP aims to change practice and nursing research aims to generate new
knowledge (Hedges, 2006). To apply QI, knowledge concerning implementation is
essential, which is defined as “methods to promote the systematic uptake of research
findings and other EBPs into routine practice and, hence, to improve the quality and
effectiveness of health services” (Eccles & Mittmann, 2006, p. 1). There are several
different approaches in implementation science (Nilsen, 2015), whereof i‐PARIHS
(implementation—Promoting Action on Research Implementation in Health Services)
is one of the most common in nursing to determine how the improvements can be
detected and measured (Harvey & Kitson, 2016). To evaluate QI, benchmarks are most
often needed, to allow the results to be compared with other entities’ outcomes (Baker,
2017). OT nurses’ in‐depth nursing care knowledge, academic skills and an ethical
approach in the perioperative context is needed to enable systematic QI.



4.5 Safe care

The fundamentals in systematic safety work are to identify and reduce adverse events to
minimize patient suffering and preventable injuries (Rutberg, Borgstedt‐Risberg,
Gustafson, & Unbeck, 2016). Surgical patients are exposed to several risks during
surgery; risk of surgical site infection due to a planned break in skin integrity and risk of
physical injury due to surgical positioning, electricity, chemicals and transfers (Rauta,
Salantera, Nivalainen, & Junttila, 2013). A large proportion of these surgical
complications are avoidable, which was shown when the World Health Organization
(WHO) surgical safety checklist was implemented, after which mortality was almost
halved and complications were significantly reduced. The OT nurse is responsible for
and verbally confirms, sterility, equipment availability, results of needle, sponge and
                                           904
instruments count and the handling of specimens in the WHO checklist (Haynes et al.,
2009).



There are several areas for which the OT nurse possesses special knowledge and skills
and therefore has special responsibility. Such an area is the prevention of postoperative
surgical site infections. The OT nurse guarantees a hygienic and aseptic environment
throughout the operation by creating a safe and sterile working surface for the use of
surgical instruments and by draping the patient, thus creating a barrier between the
wound and surrounding microorganisms (Kelvered et al., 2012). Moreover, the OT nurse
is also responsible for controlling the traffic flow in the OT (Blomberg et al., 2015).
Door openings during surgery affect the air pressure in the OR, which may allow
contaminated air to flow in and lead to unacceptable numbers of airborne bacteria‐
carrying particles and potentially result in surgical site infections (Andersson, Bergh,
Karlsson, Eriksson, & Nilsson, 2012).

The collection of specimens is common during surgical procedures, aiming to verify or
support the patient's diagnosis (Rauta et al., 2013). The OT nurse is responsible for
handling these specimens; an error can endanger the possibility of diagnosing the patient
and planning further medical treatment.



Surgical counts are another area within the OT nurse's responsibility (McGarvey,
Chambers, & Boore, 2000). The OT nurse's signature in the digital operation notes is a
guarantee that surgical counts and qualitative assessments of the surgical instruments
have been performed before the operation starts, during the procedure before wound
closure and after the operation to ensure that no material (retained foreign body) is
accidentally left in the patient. Preventing retained surgical items is one of the highest
priorities in patient safety issues identified by OT nurses (Steelman, Graling, &
Perkhounkova, 2013).



•    Operation Theatre maintenance procedures

OPERATING THEATRE PROCEDURES AND EQUIPMENT

Two things are essential for an operating theatre to run effectively and efficiently.

The first and most important is sterility. The purpose of all the precautions and
                                          905
care taken in operating theatres is to prevent infection occurring at the time of

operation. This is particularly important for eye surgery where infection is not just

a complication but a disaster. An additional risk in eye surgery is that intraocular

damage may be caused by chemicals or inappropriate irrigating solutions entering

the eye.

The second is teamwork. Surgery is not the work of one important person, “the

surgeon”, with a few other people who are not so important doing what they are

told. It is the work of a whole team. Everybody in the team is equally important

although obviously the surgeon has had a longer training than the others.

The old proverb “the strength of a chain is its weakest link” is particularly true

for operating theatre staff and procedures (see fig. 3.1). It only needs one dirty

instrument to introduce infection to the eye and destroy it. It only needs one

person in theatre to make a mistake with fluids which are irrigated in the eye, to

cause destruction of the corneal endothelium and blindness. Everyone must share

the responsibility for safety and sterility.

The reason for all good surgical practice is to make the operating theatre a safe

place.

1. Safe for the patient who must be protected from infection and other harm. The patient
is the most important person who needs protection.)

2. Safe for the staff from the risk of needle-stick and other injuries. These can spread
Hepatitis, HIV and other infections. In those parts of the world where hepatitis and HIV
infections are common, “every used needle and sharp instrument is as dangerous as a
loaded gun.”



                                               906
3. Safe for the community by careful and safe disposal of soiled materials, especially
sharp instruments and needles. In developed countries most eye surgery takes place in
very sophisticated

operating theatres dedicated to eye surgery alone, with staff who are fully trained. In
developing countries eye surgery often takes place in general theatres, and some takes
place in buildings which may have other uses and are only temporary

operating theatres. Often the staff are not fully trained and accredited as nurses or

theatre technicians. In spite of these short-comings many surgical teams have to the chain
of successful surgery – if any one link is broken, the surgery will not be successful cope
with a large volume of work and often with very limited facilities. While safety and
sterility are obviously the most important aspects of all theatre work, efficiency is also
important because of the large volume of work.

Another aspect of safety in operating theatres concerns looking after unconscious
patients receiving general anaesthesia, or resuscitating a patient who may have
collapsed. Everyone working in a theatre team should know about “basic life support”.
This is how to care for an unconscious patient or one who has collapsed.

Basic life support means how to maintain a clear airway and how to give artificial
respiration to a patient who has stopped breathing, and how to check the pulse and give
cardiac massage to a patient who has no heart beat. All theatre staff should regularly
practise these skills, so as to be ready if and when an emergency occurs.

At least one member of the theatre team should be trained in “advanced life support”,
which involves taking and interpreting ECG’s, the use of a defibrillator and giving
appropriate intravenous fluids and drugs.

Theatre procedures depend on many different factors: the work-load; the equipment
available; the choice of the surgeon; etc. Eye surgery is practised in many different ways
especially in developing countries. There are some highly effective units with a massive
through-put of cases. On the other hand, there are some surgeons who are only part-time
ophthalmologists, and there are many mobile teams working in temporary
accommodation. therefore, this chapter only discusses basic principles and guide-lines.

The Theatre Team It is important to have an adequate number of motivated and
enthusiastic staff. If they are dedicated to eye surgery, they will have a better
understanding of the requirements of both the surgeon and the patient. A happy relaxed
atmosphere and good working relationships in the theatre team makes the work much
more pleasant and mistakes less likely.
                                          907
The theatre team should have a leader who takes responsibility for organising the work
and making sure all the routine jobs are done regularly. This ensures both the safety and
efficiency of theatre work.For a regular operating list the basic personnel required are:-

1. A scrubbed assistant to look after the sterile instruments and assist the surgeon.

2. An anaesthetic assistant to give the local anaesthetics, prepare the patients and

if required help with any general anaesthetics.

3. A circulating nurse to clean and sterilise the instruments and apply the dressings.

4. A general assistant.

It is often appropriate that the team leader assumes a fairly basic position, such as

being the general assistant, in this way he or she can supervise all the other team

members.

Eye Surgery in Hot Climates

Operating Theatre Routine

There are a variety of important jobs that must be done to keep a theatre well

stocked and maintained. Many of these are rather obvious, but without maintenance
equipment will break down, and without planning spare parts and consumable materials
will run out and take a long time to be replaced.

The general routine will include:

1. Building maintenance.

2. Cleaning.

3. Maintenance of equipment and instruments.

4. Manufacture of dressings and drapes.

5. Sterilisation and disinfection procedures.

6. Stock-keeping, storage and security.
                                          908
1. Building maintenance

A good sound building is an obvious requirement for safe surgery. Eye surgery can

be performed in a great variety of buildings which are not purpose-built operating
theatres.

However, the room should be as insect-proof as possible and well ventilated. It does not
have to be blacked-out, although the windows should be shaded. Paint work should be
in good condition and a secure water supply present.

The room should have doors that can be closed during surgery. Regular inspections of
the insect-proofing are important.

2. Cleaning

General cleaning should be carried out regularly in addition to preparations on the

day of surgery. Floors and sometimes walls and ceilings must be washed in all

rooms used as part of the operating theatre suite. Any furniture including instrument
tables, operating tables and cabinets must be wiped clean to avoid the build

up of dust.

Spilt blood or other debris should be wiped up as soon as possible,because once dried it
may be difficult to remove. A weak solution of bleach is adequate for cleaning purposes
and will kill most micro-organisms including the HIV virus.

Anyone who washes drapes and surgical instruments MUST wear gloves to protect
themselves from the risk of infection.

3. Maintenance of equipment and instruments

Equipment can only function if it is regularly maintained. A schedule needs to be

drawn up for items such as sterilisers, operating lights and air conditioners. The

importance of having spares to enable quick repairs to be carried out locally cannot

be stressed too much. Surgical instruments need to be carefully looked after and

checked that they are working properly.
                                          909
Operating Theatre Procedures and Equipment 41

4. Manufacture of dressings and drapes

Eye pads.

With modern surgery and small self-sealing incisions, patients are no longer routinely
given an eye pad postoperatively. However, many patients still require an eye pad
postoperatively and outpatients may also be padded as part of their treatment. The
purpose of the eye pad is to protect the eye in the immediate post-operative period. It
also prevents the patient or his attendants from interfering with the eye and keeps flies
out. It prevents eye-lid movements against the eye and applies gentle pressure which will
encourage haemostasis and wound closure.

An eye-pad is not a substitute for poor surgery, and it is rarely necessary to keep an eye

padded for more than 2 days postoperatively.

The cost of buying ready-made pads is high and there are inevitable delays as a result of
ordering supplies. Eye pads can be manufactured locally using cotton wool and gauze.
A layer of gauze is placed on a table and onto this is put a layer of cotton wool about 2
cm thick. A further layer of gauze goes on top of the cotton wool making a cotton wool
sandwich enclosed in gauze.Then, using a simple card shape as a guide, eye pads can be
cut out.

These are placed into an autoclave box or bin for sterilization. The technique for applying
pads is simple but important. The pad needs to be placed so that the eye-lids will not be
able to open. If the eyelids open under the pad, the pad will rub against the cornea and
this will harm the eye and not protect it.

The pad is placed diagonally over the closed lids. If the eye is very deeply set it is best
to fold the pad in half and place it so that the folded edge fits below the eyebrow. The
pad is taped firmly in place using three strips of adhesive tape, ideally 1 cm wide and
positioned.

Added protection can be provided by a plastic eye-shield. These can be bought or made
locally from old X-ray plates or cardboard.

In most surgical cases it is safer to bandage the eye with elasticated or crepe Applying
an eye pad How to make a simple eye shield from X-ray plates

5. Sterilisation and Disinfection Procedures

                                          910
The sterilising of instruments, swabs, linen and eye-pads is by far the most

important step in safe surgery. Sterilisation means that all living micro-organisms,

bacteria, viruses, fungi etc. including spores have been killed. Disinfection means

that bacteria which are likely to cause infection have been killed, but spores and

some very resistant micro-organisms may survive disinfection. Obviously sterilisation is
better than disinfection. There are four common ways of sterilising or disinfecting.

Methods of Sterilisation and Disinfection

1. Autoclave

2. Dry heat oven

3. Boiling

4. Immersion in chemical solutions

Autoclaving and the dry heat oven will sterilise, and boiling and chemical solutions

will only disinfect. However, the methods of sterilisation may only disinfect if the

treatment is not applied for long enough, and a chemical which disinfects may sterilise
after a long period of immersion. Instruments must first be cleaned before sterilising.
The best time for cleaning

instruments is immediately after they have been used, otherwise blood and secretions
may become dried and encrusted. Dried blood and secretions are much more difficult to
remove, and they prevent spores and bacteria from being killed by the sterilisation
process. Instruments should be washed with soap and water using a soft brush or cloth,
paying particular attention to the joints of scissors, artery forceps and needle holders.
They should then be rinsed in clean water.

If instruments are going to be stored or sterilised using dry heat or chemicals, they should

also be carefully dried. Theatre linen and drapes can be washed at the end of the

list and left to dry in the sun.

1. Autoclave
                                          911
The autoclave is by far the safest, best and most reliable way of sterilisation. It is the
only effective way of sterilising surgical drapes and dressings, and is

the best way to sterilise surgical instruments. If used properly it is guaranteed to kill

both bacteria and spores. The autoclave produces water vapour at pressures in

excess of 1 atmosphere, and this enables temperatures up to 134 degrees Centigrade to
be achieved. The higher the pressure, the higher is the temperature at




Operating Theatre Procedures and Equipment

A Heavy needle holder for large needles

B Fine needle holder for fine needles

C Conjunctival scissors

D Intraocular scissors (Vanna’s)

E Right and left corneal scissors

F Iridectomy scissors (DeWecker’s)

G Razor blade fragment holder

H Scalpel blade (Bard-Parker)

I Heavy toothed forceps

J Conjunctival forceps

K Fine corneo-scleral forceps with teeth at the tip

L Fine corneo-scleral forceps with cups at the tip

M Curved fine corneo-scleral forceps
                                           912
N Intraocular forceps for handling the lens capsule (Kelman McPherson)

O Capsule forceps for intracapsular extraction (Arruga)

P Fine suture tying forceps

Q Right and left lens expressor

R Lens loop

S Iris repositor

T Hot point cautery for use with spirit lamp

U Irrigating cystitome

V Adjustable light speculum

X 2-way irrigating/aspirating cannula for extracapsular extraction

Y Intraocular swabs

Z 2 cc and 5 cc syringes

46 Eye Surgery in Hot Climates

A basic set of instruments for intraocular surgery

Operating Theatre Procedures and Equipment 47

A Needle holder

B Straight scissors

C Curved spring scissors

D Scalpel blade

E Squint hooks

F Fine straight artery forceps

G Curved artery forceps
                                         913
H Conjunctival forceps without teeth

I Heavy toothed forceps

J Fine toothed forceps

K Battery cautery

L Meibomian cyst lid clamp

M Small curette

N Eyelid retractor (Desmarres)

O Eyelid guard

P Large eyelid clamp

Q Eyelid clamp (Cruikshank or Erhardt)

R Adjustable speculum (Laing)

48 Eye Surgery in Hot Climates

A basic set of instruments for extraocular surgery on the eyelids

Operating Theatre Procedures and Equipment 49

autoclaving has been completed satisfactorily. Special care should be taken when

using an autoclave with attention to correct procedures and safety. The reservoir

should be checked and kept at the right level. Only distilled or rain water should be

used. Correct venting is essential although many autoclaves vent themselves at the

end of the cycle. All staff using the autoclave require training and must strictly

adhere to the instruction manual.



2. Dry Heat Oven
                                          914
A hot air oven is quite expensive but requires very little maintenance and is a very

effective way of sterilising instruments. It will preserve the edge of delicate cutting

instruments better than an autoclave. However, instruments must be scrupulously

clean and dry first, and the process is very slow. It takes 1 hour at 180 degrees

Centigrade to sterilise instruments, and then the instruments must be left to cool.

3. Boiling

The great advantage of boiling is that it is very quick, simple, easy and cheap.

However, boiling does not sterilise, it only disinfects. Boiling for 10 minutes will kill

all bacteria but it will not kill spores. Although this is a problem in theory it is not

a real problem in practice. However, boiling has two particular disadvantages:

1. Repeated boiling will cause tarnishing and corrosion of instruments and will

certainly, damage the cutting edge of fine instruments. Corrosion is lessened by

adding 2% sodium carbonate to the solution. If possible, distilled water should be

used and not tap water. This is available commercially from garages as water for car

batteries. Distilled water will not cause corrosion.

2. After boiling the instruments are wet. They can be dried with a sterile gauze but

this might compromise sterility and will break the “no touch technique” rule of

not touching the instrument end that enters the eye. If they are used when wet,

water from the handle of the instrument will drip down on to the working end

and again, compromise the no touch “technique”. If the instruments are placed

in the boiler in a perforated rack or tray, then they will dry automatically and

not require handling. In emergencies, drapes can be sterilised by boiling and
                                            915
then squeezed dry, although this is certainly not a technique to be recommended.

4. Chemical Solutions

Most chemical solutions are effective against bacteria but not against spores, and

so they only disinfect but do not sterilise. However, if the instruments are left in the

chemical for long enough they may indeed sterilise. Chemical sterilisation and

disinfection is good at preserving sharp instruments but there are two main

disadvantages.

1. These chemical disinfectants are very toxic especially to the inside of the eye,

and the instruments must be thoroughly rinsed in sterile water and dried very

carefully after immersion in the chemical. This again will break the “no touch

technique” rule.

2. With time or use, the solution may lose some of its potency, or may become

chemically inactivated, or the alcohol in alcohol based chemicals may evaporate.

50 Eye Surgery in Hot Climates

The most commonly used solutions are Chlorhexidine (trade name Hibitane) or

Chlorhexidine and Cetrimide combined (trade name Savlon).

Hibitane is available as a 5% concentrate and needs to be diluted 10 times with

70% alcohol to make a solution which is 0.5% Chlorhexidine (Hibitane) in 70%

alcohol and 30% water (i.e. one part of concentrate for 9 parts of 70% alcohol).

Savlon is available as a concentrate containing 1.5% Chlorhexidine and

15% Cetrimide and needs to be diluted thirty times in 70% alcohol (1 part of

concentrate for 29 parts of 70% alcohol).
                                           916
Both of these solutions should disinfect instruments after 10 minutes. After

prolonged usage some of the alcohol may evaporate and the solution may lose its

strength. If alcohol is not available concentrated Savlon diluted 1:30 in boiled

water will disinfect instruments after 30 minutes.

Povidone Iodine is another widely used disinfecting agent, which is effective

against most micro -organisms. A 10% solution can be made as follows :

Take 500ml of distilled water (cooled, boiled rain water is an alternative)

Add sodium phosphate 16.6 gms and citric acid 3.4gms(these act as a chemical

buffer)

Then add 50 gms of Povidone Iodine, thus making a 10% solution.This will also

disinfect instruments after 10 minutes.

A 10% solution of Povidone Iodine can be used for cleaning the eyelids and the

conjunctival sac preoperatively, but if it is left in the conjunctival sac for some time,

some people think that 5% is safer.

Formalin vapour is an effective sterilising agent against all micro-organisms and

spores. It is supplied as formalin tablets, which are placed in an airtight container

at a warm room temperature. 12 hours are required for sterilisation.

The sterilisation of cryoprobes often presents a problem. They can only be

autoclaved at lower temperatures and so will take half an hour for the cycle.

Cryoprobes are quite often sterilised by immersion in chemical solutions between

patients on the same list. As the probe actually enters the eye great care must be

taken both to wash off all these chemicals, and also to make sure that the probe is
                                           917
not in any way contaminated. A small portable cryoprobe used with freon gas can

however be safely boiled. (Do not boil the cylinder of gas itself, as it will explode!)

Sterilised instruments, drapes and dressings can be safely stored and transported in
sealed autoclave bins and trays. If such bins or trays are not available all

items must be double wrapped in linen before sterilisation and can then be safely

stored or transported.

Stock keeping, Storage and Security

Good stock keeping to maintain essential supplies is often overlooked. However its

importance cannot be over emphasised especially when there may be long delays

between ordering supplies and their arrival. A system of monitoring stores and the

rate at which consumables such as medicines, dressings, sutures etc. are used will

allow for ordering and budgeting. Money is always limited so there is no place for

holding excessive quantities. The only way to be aware of annual usage and any

seasonal variations in consumption is to have a strict system of stock keeping.This

Operating Theatre Procedures and Equipment 51

important part of theatre management should be the responsibility of the person in

charge of the theatre.

It is obvious that equipment and supplies should be stored in a place where they

will not deteriorate, and where they are safe.

Managing with Limited Resources

In many circumstances the volume of surgical work or financial limitations mean

that correct theatre procedures cannot be followed strictly. In correct theatre


                                          918
procedures everybody who enters the operating theatre and all the staff and

patients should wear a complete change of clothes. All those operating scrub up

completely between cases with fresh gloves and a fresh gown. Often it may not be

possible to maintain these standards. The patients may have to come to the

operating theatre wearing their own clothes.The surgical staff should always scrub

up completely at the beginning of a list, but may be obliged just to change their

gloves in between cases or even to wipe their gloves in alcohol between cases. In

order to maintain surgical through put it may be necessary to have more than one

operating table in the same operating room.

To ensure safe surgery there are four areas in which “cutting corners” and

compromises are strictly forbidden.These are:

1. Correct preparation of the patient for surgery, with a thorough cleaning of the

face and skin preparation around the eye (see pages 57–8). This includes

“marking” the eye for surgery to avoid mistakes.

2. Sterilisation of all instruments, drapes and dressings. If an item like an

intraocular lens comes from the manufacturer in a sterile wrapping, then make

sure that the packaging has not in any way been damaged.

3. Sterilisation and purity of all solutions used in intraocular irrigation.

4. The correct handling of instruments and dressings and the use of a “no touch

technique”. Nothing that enters the eye should touch the eyelids or lashes.

People working in small units, or on tour in rural areas may have to rely on boiling

and chemicals as the only means of disinfecting between cases. Although this is not
                                            919
the best way it appears to be safe as long as everyone sticks to the rules. Some

people will boil the blunt instruments and use chemicals for the sharps.

• Don’t try to shorten the time needed for immersion in chemicals or boiling.

• Make sure that the chemical solution is fresh.

• Make sure that the instruments are dried with a sterile swab and there is no

chemical residue on the instruments. This should be done by someone who

understands how important this is.

• Never rely on just wiping the instruments between cases with spirit,

ether or acetone. It just isn’t safe enough.

52 Eye Surgery in Hot Climates

Infection Control Strategy

Post-operative infections do sometimes occur, even with the most careful and well

trained surgical team. Good units have an infection rate of about one case in a

thousand or less. It is reasonable to assume that any infection developing within

the first post-operative week has been contracted at the time of the operation. Even

an isolated case of post-operative infection should make the surgeon and the

surgical team review all their techniques, equipment and procedures. If several

infections occur close to each other an even more radical overhaul of theatre

procedures is required. Any irrigating fluids should be discarded and a new batch

obtained. All made up disinfectant solutions should be discarded and new ones

made, and the steriliser changed or a new method of sterilisation tried. If available

an infection control officer or a microbiology department will help to trace the
                                           920
source of an infection.The following is a list of the more common possible sources

of infection during surgery:

Sources of Infection

From the patient Conjunctivitis.

Blepharitis.

Dacryocystitis.

Septic lesion near the eye.

From the staff Septic lesions.

Poor scrubbing up.

Contaminated gloves.

Failure to observe ″no touch technique″ by the

surgeon or assistant, or touching the lids or

lashes with instruments entering the eye.

Prolonged manipulation during the operation.

From the theatre equipment Contaminated irrigating fluid.

Faulty steriliser.

Faulty sterilising technique.

Contamination of sterile trolleys e.g. from flies.

Contamination or inactivation of disinfectant

solutions.

Broken or defective packaging for an IOL or

instrument which is factory sterilised.
                                            921
•    Referral of faulty equipment and apparatus

Ensure that defective equipment is taken out of service, clearly labeled and disinfected,
and that proper validation is performed once equipment is repaired

When equipment is broken and needs repair, it is highly important to eliminate the risk
of the person performing the repair becoming infected with pathogenic organisms.
Besides, it must be clear to everybody that the equipment is defect which prevents that
people still try to use the defective equipment, creating potential hazards to the
equipment, the person using it and the test result.




You have to be certain that equipment that is returned into service after being repaired is
able to perform correctly and delivers good quality and true results.



Write an SOP that provides all the procedures that must be followed when a piece of
equipment is defective; from disinfection and removal from the laboratory to returning
into the laboratory following proper validation. Include in this SOP at least the
following:



Procedure for disinfecting the equipment, including specification of when it should be
disinfected.

Procedure ensuring that equipment is clearly labeled as defective directly after detecting
that it is broken, preventing further use of the equipment. This label must also indicate
if the equipment has been disinfected.

Procedure for ensuring appropriate packaging when the equipment needs to be
transported, preventing further damage to the equipment.

Procedure for ensuring that adequate repair is done according to the SOPs in which the
procedures for maintenance of the broken piece of equipment are described (including
recording of repairs in the equipment files).

                                          922
Procedure that has to be followed when equipment is returned into service again after
reparation: verification that the equipment is able to achieve the predefined performance
requirements and that it is able to deliver a true and high quality result (which is called
validation of equipment).

In the right-hand column you can find background information regarding equipment
repair and maintenance from the WHO Laboratory Quality Management System
(LQMS) handbook.




With regard to the last point: As the performance requirements differ per piece of
equipment you cannot define these in the SOP. Therefore, include a form for recording
that validation has happened. This form is similar to the equipment reception checklist
(attached to the SOP for Procurement and Reception of Equipment): it is used to verify
that the piece of equipment is able to achieve performance requirements formulated by
you. Hence the form must have space allocated for formulation of performance
requirements to which the piece of equipment must be tested and must comply with.
Make sure the form guides the person validating the equipment through the whole
process in a stepwise manner.




After finishing the validation the person should sign the form and give the form to the
Equipment Officer for archiving in the equipment file. This form will be an appendix of
the SOP.




                                          923
•    Monitoring and evaluation in Operation Theatre



Hospital-centric Metrics There are several performance measures of ORs, which are of
special interest to the hospital involved due to their impact on productivity or revenue.
Since these measures do not take into consideration the experience of patients who have
undergone surgeries, we collectively define them as hospital-centric metrics. Some of
the commonly cited hospital-metric metrics include OR utilisation, throughput, waiting
time of surgeons, overtime costs, contribution margin, and makespan as defined and
illustrated the bellow

Metric Description

OR utilization Ratio of time spent* by patients in OR to total OR time available

Throughput Number of surgical cases per unit time

Waiting time of surgeons Length of time spent by surgeons waiting prior to the start of
their procedure.

Overtime costs Additional costs incurred due to performance of surgeries beyond the
                                         924
standard operating hours

Contribution margin is typically computed in terms of dollar per unit

OR time and is the revenue generated by a surgical case

  Learning outcome 4: Decontamination in Operation Theatre instrument and
  apparatus

Introduction to the learning outcome

Upon completion of this unit describes the knowledge, skills and attitudes required to
Decontamination in Operation Theatre instrument and apparatuses-arrangement of
theatre room, Referral of faulty equipment and apparatus and Documentation of
Operation Theatre technical service
Performance Standard
   1. Used Instruments and equipment are decontaminated according to WHO standards
   2. Theatre room is rearranged in accordance with work place set- up
   3. Faulty apparatuses and instruments are referred to maintenance department
      according to work place policy
   4. Technical services are documented in accordance with work place procedures
   5. Waste is disposed with due regard to environment protection regulations

Definition of terms

Standards of Practice for the Decontamination of Surgical Instruments

Introduction

The following Standards of Practice were researched and authored by the AST Education

and Professional Standards Committee and have been approved by the AST Board of

Directors. They are effective April 16, 2009.

AST developed the Standards of Practice to support healthcare facilities in the

reinforcement of best practices related to the decontamination of surgical instruments in

the perioperative setting. The purpose of the Standards is to provide an outline that the

Certified Surgical Technologist (CST) and Certified First Assistant (CSFA) can use to

                                          925
develop and implement policies and procedures for the decontamination of surgical

instruments. The Standards are presented with the understanding that it is the

responsibility of the healthcare facility to develop, approve and establish policies and

procedures for cleaning and disinfecting surgical instruments according to established

healthcare facility protocols.

Rationale

The following are Standards of Practice related to the proper decontamination of surgical

instruments (henceforth, simply referred to as instruments) in the perioperative setting.

Instruments that are opened on the sterile field, whether used or not used, during the

surgical procedure must be thoroughly decontaminated prior to disinfection and/or

sterilization. The terms cleaning and decontamination are often used synonymously to

indicate a physical and chemical process of removal of organic material, soil and debris,

and microorganisms from inanimate objects, such as instruments. The term cleaning

frequently, as indicated in the prior sentence, refers to the removal of microorganisms as

opposed to killing. However, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration defines

decontamination as, “the use of physical or chemical means to remove, inactivate, or

destroy blood-borne pathogens on a surface or item to the point where they are no longer

capable of transmitting infectious particles and the surface or item is rendered safe for

handling, use, or disposal.”27 For the remainder of this document, the terms cleaning
and

decontamination will be used synonymously, and the OSHA definition will apply to both

terms, meaning the process removes, inactivates or destroys microorganisms.


                                          926
When performed properly, cleaning effectively reduces the bioburden in order to prepare

the instruments for disinfection and sterilization. The importance of this step cannot be

overemphasized since organic material, soil, and debris can block the disinfectant or

sterilizing agent from making complete contact with the surface of the instruments.

Additionally, cleaning allows for the safe handling of the instruments by healthcare

workers (HCWs).

Standard of Practice I

The cleaning of instruments should begin during the surgical procedure to prevent

drying of blood, soil and debris on the surface and within lumens.

1. The CST in the first scrub role should keep the instruments free of debris and

blood during the surgical procedure.

A. The instruments should be wiped clean using a sterile, water-moistened

sponge. Care must be taken that the sponge is not used on the tissues of the patient.

B. Instruments with lumens should be flushed with a sterile, water-filled

syringe to remove blood and debris and prevent drying of the gross soil.

C. Instruments that may not be used for the remainder of procedure, eg,

acetabular reamers used during a total hip arthroplasty, may be placed into

a basin containing sterile water to soak.

D. Saline must not be used, since the chloride ions can cause pitting and

deterioration of the finish on the surface of the instruments.

Standard of Practice II

The cleaning of instruments should continue at the point of use post-procedure,
                                            927
including sorting and disassembly of instruments, containment and transportation

the decontamination room.

1. Post-procedure, after removal of the sterile gown and gloves, the CST should

wear personal protective equipment (PPE) when breaking down the sterile back

table.

2. Instruments should never be soaked in saline or sodium hypochlorite (bleach)

solution. The chloride ions in both solutions are highly corrosive, causing the

breakdown of the finish on instruments, as well as the metal.

A. It is recommended that soaking soiled instruments begin in the OR at the

completion of the procedure. The instruments can be placed in a basin

containing a mixture of sterile water and enzymatic detergent. Refer to the

manufacturer’s instructions for the correct amounts of sterile water and

enzymatic detergent to be mixed.

3. All instruments that were on the sterile field, whether used or not used, are

considered contaminated, and a possible source of microorganisms that could

cause an infection in HCWs and patients.

A. All instruments must be properly separated and placed in leakproof,

puncture-resistant containers that are marked with a biohazard label to

allow easy identification by other HCWs that the contents are

contaminated and therefore hazardous.

(1) The infection hazard to the surgical team members is greatest during the handling
and separation of contaminated instruments at the point of use. However, separation is
best done in the OR by the CST who is familiar with the back table set up, including
                                          928
location of the sharps container, as well as other sharps such as trocars in order to prevent
injury to other surgical team members.(2) A sponge moistened with water should be used
to wipe gross soil and blood from the instruments that were used during the surgical
procedure. It is recommended not to clean the instruments within a water-filled basin in
order to prevent splashing of the fluid on the floor or other surfaces of the OR

(3) Ringed instruments should be placed in a carrier arranged in single layers or placed
on stringers. Box locks should be opened.Assembled instruments should be taken apart.
Heavy instruments and delicate instruments, such as microsurgical instruments should
be placed in separate trays.

(4) Reusable sharp instruments with points or edges should be placed in a separate
puncture-resistant, closable container.

(5) Instruments should be kept wet in the transport container by covering with a water-
soaked towel or spray, foam or gel product specifically intended for this purpose. The
instruments should not be transported in the water and enzymatic soaking solution in
order to prevent splashing and reduce the weight of the transportcontainer.

The enzymatic solution should be properly discarde according to surgery department
policy by the CST who is wearing PPE.

B. Contaminated instruments should be contained during transport from the point of use
to the decontamination area.

(1) Contaminated instruments should be handled as little as possible at the point of use
and should be immediately contained and transported to the decontamination area.
Immediate containment

and transport reduces the risk of surgical personnel’s contact with the contaminated
instruments.

(2) Containment should be achieved through the use of some type of container that has
been identified to prevent surgical personnel and other HCWs from contact with the
contaminated instruments and prevention of airborne microorganisms during transport.

The type of container to be used depends on the items to be transported. Types of
recommended containers include closed carts, bins with lids, rigid sterilization container
systems, and impermeable bags that can be used alone or in combination.




                                           929
(3) Rigid sterilization container systems with intact, dry filters and closed valves are an
accepted method for the transportation of contaminated instruments. However, the use
of the container for

transportation purposes should be confirmed by consulting the manufacturer’s
instructions. Some manufacturers recommend not using the same container for
transporting contaminated instruments that is also used for the sterilization of the
instruments.

(4) The rigid sterilization container system requires no additional covering, unless the
external surfaces have been contaminated with blood and/or body fluids. If the container
has been handled

and touched by a person who has had contact with blood or body fluids, such as the CST,
it should be assumed it is contaminated.In this instance, the container should be enclosed
in a red

biohazard bag, bin with a lid or closed cart.

When purchasing arigid sterilization container system, the healthcare facility should

consult the manufacturer’s information to confirm if the container can be easily and
effectively decontaminated.

(5) The external surfaces of bins with lids, closed carts and other containers should be
decontaminated after each use with an Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) -
registered,

intermediate-level disinfectant. The containers should bethoroughly wiped down
externally and internally. The use of a cart wash system is recommended for
decontaminating closed carts. Additionally, routine cleaning of the case cart wheels
should be performed to remove string and other debris to maintain the easy movement
of the wheels.

Standard of Practice III

Cleaning/detergent agents should be selected that will not damage the cleaning
equipment and effectively clean instruments.

1. The chemicals in the cleaning agent(s) should not be corrosive to the cleaning
equipment including the ultrasonic cleaner, washer-decontaminator, or washersterilizer.


                                          930
2. The chemicals in the cleaning agent(s) should not cause electrolytic action between
the instruments and cleaning equipment.

3. The cleaning agent(s) should not be corrosive and damaging to the instruments.

4. Cleaning agent(s) should be easily removed from the instruments by rinsing with water
in order to avoid residual chemicals that could corrode and damage the instruments as
well as present a danger to the patient.

5. It is recommended to select a detergent with a pH between 7-10 to use in the cleaning
of instruments.16 Detergents that have a pH of higher than 7 are more effective in the
removal of organic debris such as blood, fat and feces.

6. Antimicrobial solutions, such as iodophors that are used for skin antisepsis,should
never be used for cleaning instruments.

7. Manufacturer’s instructions for the use of detergents should always be followed.

The instructions should be kept on file and accessible at all times by HCWs.

8. The following are the ideal characteristics of a cleaning agent.

A. Low sudsing/foaming

B. Easily rinsed off

C. Disperse organic soil

D. Biodegradable

E. Nontoxic

F. Nonabrasive

G. Effective on all types of organic soil

H. Cost-effective

I. Long shelf life

Standard of Practice IV

Cleaning may be performed manually, mechanically or a combination of both. The
                                            931
selection of the cleaning method should be based upon the type of device and
manufacturer’s recommendations. However, cleaning alone may not be sufficient to
decontaminate items that present a high risk of disease transmission such as surgical
instruments and therefore, should undergo a microbicidal process.

1. The manufacturer should provide written instructions for the reprocessing of the
instrument(s) or device(s) that include recommendations for the type of cleaning method
to be used, type of cleaning equipment and cleaning agent(s).

A. The cleaning method should not affect the function of the instruments or

devices and should be safe to use by HCWs.

B. The manufacturer’s instructions should be kept on file and accessible at all times by
HCWs.

C. Prior to HCWs using cleaning equipment and/or cleaning agents that are not
recommended by the manufacturer for particular instruments or devices, the HCW
should contact the manufacturer for recommendations,as well as contact the
manufacturers of the cleaning equipment and cleaning agent(s).

2. Manual cleaning is recommended for delicate instruments and devices, such as
microsurgical instruments, lensed instruments, power equipment, and other instruments
that cannot tolerate an automated cleaning process.

A. Immersible instruments and devices should be kept submerged in the water to prevent
aerosolization. Non-immersible instruments and devices should be cleaned according to
the manufacturer’s instructions.

B. The water with detergent should be kept at a temperature in a range of 27º

C to 44º C (80º F – 110º F). Temperatures over 110º F cause coagulation and thus prevent
removal of protein substances. Water temperatures that are too cold may not activate the
detergent.

C. After cleaning, instruments and devices should be thoroughly rinsed to remove
detergent residue and debris.

(1) Rinsing is extremely important, because residuals can reduce the efficacy of the
disinfection and sterilization processes and possibly cause damage to the tissues of the
surgical patient.


                                         932
D. Scouring pads and abrasive cleaning agents should not be used for cleaning
instruments and devices in order to prevent damage to the items.

E. Only brushes designated for use in cleaning instruments and devices should be
purchased by the healthcare facility.

(1) Reusable brushes create a risk for cross-contamination.Reusable brushes should be
cleaned and decontaminated at least daily or when heavily soiled. Brushes that show
wear should be discarded.

(2) Brushes used to clean instruments and devices with lumens must be the correct size.
If the brush is too large, it will not properly fit into the lumen; if shoved into the lumen
it could damage the

instrument or device and possibly become stuck within. If too small, the brush will not
make complete contact with the lumen’s surface and prevent thorough cleaning.

F. A three-sink method should be used for manual cleaning: A sink with tap water and
detergent; second sink with tap water for rinsing; third sink with distilled/de-ionized
water as a second rinse to aid in preventing staining.

3. The use of mechanical cleaning equipment is recommended as the primary method
for decontamination of instruments and devices that can withstand theprocess.
Mechanical cleaning equipment provides the advantage of exposing the instruments and
devices to a microbicidal process.

A. The use of mechanical cleaning equipment significantly reduces theamount of contact
time between the HCW and contaminated items.

 B. Thermal disinfection can be accomplished with the use of washersanitizers, washer-
decontaminators, washer-disinfectors, and washersterilizers. Washer sanitizers provide
the lowest level of disinfection, and washer-sterilizers offer the highest level of
disinfection.

(1) Thermal disinfection should only be used to render items safe to handle by HCWs
not wearing PPE and not as a process in which they are ready for reuse in surgery.
Critical items should always be put through a sterilization process as well as semi-critical
items should be either sterilized or high level disinfected.

(2) To ensure proper functioning of the equipment, routine maintenance should be
performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions, the strainer should be cleaned


                                          933
on a daily basis, and the operating instructions provided by the manufacturer should be
followed.

(3) Time and temperature should be monitored and documented.

(4) HCWs must be careful when removing hot items from the equipment in order to
avoid burns. The items may be wet with hot water. Additionally, water that drips on the
floor may make it slippery; the water should be wiped from the floor.




                                        934
•    Re-arrangement of theatre room




he circulator should check the operating room schedule the day before surgery for any
changes that may have been made. The operating room specialist should be in the
assigned room in plenty of time to prepare for the surgical procedure.



Centralized Materiel Service should be notified of any special equipment and/or
instruments that may be needed for the case that are not readily available.



b. Personal cleanliness is extremely important for the operating room specialist.



Before performing the duties described in the following paragraphs for preparation of
the operating room, the circulator should wash his hands thoroughly and don a surgical
hat. The surgical cap must cover the hair completely to prevent possible contamination

                                         935
of the sterile area by falling hair or dandruff. He should then don a clean, cotton scrub
suit before entering the semi-restricted areas of the surgical suite.



Before entering a restricted area, the OR specialist must don a surgical mask per local
SOP. The mask protects the patient from bacteria exhaled by operating room personnel.
The mask must fit snugly around the nose and mouth to filter the air through it rather
than around the sides of the mask. The mask should be changed whenever it becomes
damp and after each procedure.



The correct procedures for donning scrub suit, surgical hat, shoe covers, and surgical
mask are provided in detail in Subcourse MD0933, Scrub, Gown, and Glove Procedures,
which you should have studied prior to this subcourse. Now you are ready to prepare the
operating room for surgery.



c. Damp dust the operating room unless this has already been done by personnel on the
previous shift.



Concurrent with dusting, check equipment, arrange furniture, and restock supplies. After
damp dusting with a cloth soaked in disinfectant solution prescribed by local policy, wet
vacuum the floor using a disinfectant prescribed by local policy. Dry dusting and
mopping is never done in the operating room because it raises dust that contains bacteria.



(1) Damp dusting should be done before the first scheduled incision time of the day.



(2) Establish and follow a definite order when damp dusting furniture. Start with the
tallest equipment and work down since this method helps the settling of airborne
microorganisms. Damp dust the operating room overhead light first, then the operating
table. Work from the center of the room to the perimeter (outer limits) and from the
tallest item to the lowest. If you are called from the room, leave the damp dusting cloth


                                          936
on the item being dusted; this will serve as the starting point when resuming dusting
duties.



(3) As the damp dusting is accomplished, set up the equipment and check each item for
proper functioning. This will save time and energy. This includes such things as:



(a) Switch on the overhead light to ensure proper functioning.



(b) Check the operating table for proper working order.



(c) Check the suction machine, the electrosurgical unit, and other pieces of equipment in
the operating room whether or not they are to be used.



(d) Line the kick buckets with plastic bags.



(e) Check the supply cabinets for stock. Restock, if necessary.



(4) Consult with the scrub on the arrangement of the furniture for the surgical procedure.
In general, the area chosen for the sterile setup should be away from doorways and
traffic. It should be in the most closed-in area away from the cabinets that are to be
opened during the setup. As damp dusting continues, arrange the furniture for the sterile
setup so that the scrub can work within the sterile field and the circulator can work
outside the field.



d. Check with the scrub for any special equipment he may need for the case.


                                          937
e. If the instruments were not wrapped and sterilized on the preceding shift, ensure that
instrument sets are placed in the autoclave.



f. Check that all equipment needed to position the patient is in the room. If not, get the
necessary equipment.



g. Discuss with the scrub the sterile supplies needed for the case (be sure to discuss the
kind and amount of sutures needed) and then bring the supplies into the room. The
surgeon’s preference card will list the types and sizes of sutures needed for the
procedure.



h. Place sterile goods on the tables or stands where they will be used to avoid having to
move them from one place to another. You should place the various sterile items as
indicated in (1) through (6) below.



(1) The linen or drape pack on the large instrument table (backtable).



(2) The gown pack on the prep table.



(3) The Mayo tray on the Mayo stand.



(4) The sterile basin set into the ring stand.



(5) The prep set placed on the prep table. Only after the scrub dons the gown and the
wrapper is removed,


                                            938
(6) The instrument set on a ring stand or table.



i. Put sterile packages that the scrub will not need immediately (such as suction tubing
and culture tubes) on the utility table and open them after the scrub has prepared a space
for them. You may also place on the utility tables supplies needed from the sterile supply
cabinets such as knife blades, needles, etc.



j. Do not place sterile supplies on the operating table nor on the anesthetist’s equipment
(the anesthesia apparatus and the anesthetist’s table) because these areas are for the use
by the anesthetist only.



k. Open the sterile supplies. Before any sterile supplies are opened, however, the
integrity of every package is checked for tears, punctures, watermarks, expiration date,
and the sterilization indicator. Tears, punctures, and watermarks on a sterile pack
indicate that the supplies are unsafe to use. The sterilization indicator shows whether the
pack has been through the sterilization process. The date of expiration will tell you
whether it is too old for safe use. If the package is in any way compromised, it must be
discarded and a new pack secured.



l. Open the packs and sets in the order in which the scrub will need them. Open the sterile
gown first; the scrub will need this immediately upon entering the room.



(1) Remove the tape from the packages, unwrap the item, and check the indicator tape
to ensure item has been through the sterilization process. If the indicator tape shows no
or incomplete sterilization process, discard the package and secure a new one.



(2) After opening the pack containing the scrub’s gown, open the basin set, the linen
pack, the prep set ,and the instrument set.



                                          939
m. All sterile wrappers are to be removed in the same general manner. Open the wrapper
so that your hand and arm do not pass over any part of the inside of the wrapper that has
been expos

•    Documentation of Operation Theatre technical service

An operating theatre book is essential: it contains detailed records of the patients
operated on and the surgical procedures performed. This is useful information for
planning and ordering supplies. All information in the operating theatre book is
considered to be confidential.



Information to be recorded in the operating theatre book Consecutive patient number
(OT number)

Patient name

Age/sex

Patient's admission number

Diagnosis

Aetiology

Surgical procedure done

Surgeon

Type of anaesthesia given

Anaesthetist



For ease of identification, each patient's first operation should be entered with a red pen
and subsequent operations in blue/black.



For accurate record-keeping there are two or three numbers recorded in the operation
book for each operation:
                                          940
• the number that corresponds to the number of operations performed in the operation
theatre (the consecutive OT number)

• the patient's admission number, which corresponds to the number written on the
individual patient record



Recording the diagnosis/aetiology may only be necessary for the initial operation (see
Fig. 39).



Other useful documents and checklists include:

• operation lists

• compress check for laparotomies

• weekly maintenance checks

• weekly oiling of instruments

• duty roster

• diary of ward rounds for compilation of operating lists

The operating theatre book.




                                         941
The first two patients are routine cases and their entries are written in black; note that in
the “diagnosis” column the diagnosis is replaced by their “OT” number which
corresponds to the operation number of their initial surgical intervention: this saves time.

Subsequent patients are new admissions (admitted during an influx of wounded); their
entries are written in red so that they can be easily identified as new cases.



Note that the triage numbers are also written in the patient number column. This is
because very often patients admitted during an influx are not allocated an admission
number before being transferred to the operating theatre, but it is nevertheless essential
to be able to identify each patient accurately.




SHORT RESPONSES FOR LEARNING OUTCOME 4

1.List useful documents and checklists include:

2. As the damp dusting is accomplished, set up list the item you will check for for proper
functioning

3. After cleaning, instruments and devices should be thoroughly rinsed explain the
importance of rinsing,

4.The CST in the first scrub role should keep the instruments free of debris and

blood during the surgical procedure. explain how this is done

SHORT RESPONSES ANSWERS FOR LEARNING OUTCOME 4

1.List useful documents and checklists include:

• operation lists

• compress check for laparotomies

                                           942
• weekly maintenance checks

• weekly oiling of instruments

• duty roster

• diary of ward rounds for compilation of operating lists

The operating theatre book.

2. As the damp dusting is accomplished, set up list the item you will check for for proper
functioning

(a) Switch on the overhead light to ensure proper functioning.



(b) Check the operating table for proper working order.



(c) Check the suction machine, the electrosurgical unit, and other pieces of equipment in
the operating room whether or not they are to be used.

3. After cleaning, instruments and devices should be thoroughly rinsed explain the
importance of rinsing,

Rinsing is extremely important, because residuals can reduce the efficacy of the
disinfection and sterilization processes and possibly cause damage to the tissues of the
surgical patient.



(d) Line the kick buckets with plastic bags.



(e) Check the supply cabinets for stock. Restock, if necessary.

4.The CST in the first scrub role should keep the instruments free of debris and

blood during the surgical procedure.explain how this is done

                                          943
A. The instruments should be wiped clean using a sterile, water-moistened

sponge. Care must be taken that the sponge is not used on the tissues of the patient.

B. Instruments with lumens should be flushed with a sterile, water-filled

syringe to remove blood and debris and prevent drying of the gross soil.

C. Instruments that may not be used for the remainder of procedure, eg,

acetabular reamers used during a total hip arthroplasty, may be placed into

a basin containing sterile water to soak.

D. Saline must not be used, since the chloride ions can cause pitting and




REFERENCES

1.more information, please click here http://www.chinacaremedical.com/c/patient-
monitor_0375

2. Observational teamwork assessment for surgery (OTAS) S.Undre, A.Healey,

C.A.Vincent, A.Darzi poster presentation at BAUS Harrogate 2004

3. Simulation versus Reality: S. Undre: Invited presentation at the Scottish

Standing Committee meeting of the Association of Anaesthetists. Stirling,

Scotland, U.K Feb 2005

4. Multidisciplinary Crisis Simulations: The way forward for training surgical

teams. Undre S, Koutantji M, Sevdalis N, Selvapatt N, Williams S, Gautama

S, McCulloch P, Vincent C, Darzi A: Poster presentation at World Congress


                                            944
of Endourology 2005, Amsterdam

5. Effects of training in team communication, briefing and checklisting during

multidisciplinary crisis simulation. Rao, K.; Gautama, S.; McCulloch, P.;

Koutantji, M.; Undre, S.; Thomas„ P.; Sevdalis, N.; Cunniffe, S.

Anaesthesia. 61(1):90-91, January 2006.

6. Observational teamwork assessment for surgery (OTAS) S.Undre, A.Healey,

C.A.Vincent, A.Darzi oral presentation European Association of Work and

Organisational Psychology. Istabul, Turkey May 2005

7. Teamwork in Surgery. S Undre, N Sevdalis. Oral presentation at the NPSA

safety seminar. July 2006, London

8. Sevdalis N, Undre S, Healey, AN, Vincent C, Darzi, A. Observational

Teamwork Assessment for Surgery: An Empirical. Review. International

Association for Applied Psychology, Athens, July 2006

Journal articles citing work from the thesis (OTAS 2004 QSHC paper)

1. Catchpole KR, Giddings AEB, De Leval MR, et al. Identification of systems

failures in successful paediatric cardiac surgery. Ergonomics 49 (5-6): 567-

588 Apr-May 2006

2. Sevdalis N, McCulloch P. Teaching evidence-based decision-making. Surg

Clin North Am 86 (1): 59 Feb 2006

3. Yule S, Ffin R, Paterson-Brown S, et al. Non-technical skills for surgeons in

the operating room: A review of the literature. Surg 139 (2): 140-149 Feb

2006
                                          945
4. McCulloch P. Surgical professionalism in the 21st century. Lancet 367

(9505): 177-181 Jan 2006

5. Moorthy K, Munz Y, Adams S, et al. A human factors analysis of technical

and team skills among surgical trainees during procedural simulations in a

simulated operating theatre. Ann Surg 242 (5): 631-639 Nov 2005

6. Moorthy K, Vincent C, Darzi A. Simulation based training. BMJ 330 (7490):

493-494A Mar 2005




                                CHAPTER ELEVEN

         EXECUTE PERIOPERATIVE ADMINISTRATIVE DUTIES




                               CHAPTER TWELVE

      MANAGEMENT OF PERIOPERATIVE THEATRE RESOURCES
Unit of learning code: HE/CU/TT/CR/06/6/A

Related Unit of Competency in Occupational Standard: Manage Perioperative
Theatre Resources

Introduction tos the unit of learning


                                        946
 This unit standard specifies competencies required to Plan and Prepare to Manage
 Perioperation Theatre resources, Organise Perioperation Theatre resources,Direct
 Perioperation Theatre resources ,Control Perioperation Theatre resources and Document
 Perioperation Theatre resources.

  Summary of Learning Outcomes

    1) Plan and Prepare to Manage Perioperation Theatre resources
    2) Organise Perioperation Theatre resources
    3) Direct Perioperation Theatre resources
    4) Control Perioperation Theatre resources
    5) Document Perioperation Theatre resources




2.1 Learning Outcome 1: Plan and Prepare to Manage Perioperation Theatre
    resources

 Introduction to the learning outcome

 Upon completion of this unit, the trainees should be able to demonstrate knowledge,
 skills and attitude on basic management, management theories, perioperation theatre
 resources, Theatre layout and Resource mobilization.



  Performance Standard

     1. Operation theatre resources are identified according to Standard Management
        Principles
     2. PT resources are gathered according to Standard Management Principles and work
        place policy
     3. Condition of PT resources is verified as per Standard Management Principles

 Definition of terms

 Theory: a supposition or a system of ideas intended to explain something, especially
 one based on general principles independent of the thing to be explained

 Resources: a stock or supply of money, materials, staff, and other assets that can be
 drawn on by a person or organization in order to function effectively

                                          947
Policy: a course of action adopted and pursued by a government, ruler, political party,
etc.: our nation's foreign policy. action or procedure conforming to or considered with
reference to prudence or expediency: It was good policy to consent

Content/procedures/methods/illustrations

Plan and Prepare to Manage Perioperation Theatre resources

Management: is the coordination and administration of tasks to achieve a goal. Such
administration activities include setting the organization's strategy and coordinating the
efforts of staff to accomplish these objectives through the application of available
resources.

Basic management

What Is Management?

Management is essential to any organization that wishes to be efficient and achieve its
aims. Without someone in a position of authority there would be organizational anarchy
with no structure and very little, if any focus. It has been said that management has four
basic functions – planning, organizing, leading and controlling. Common sense dictates
that without these principles of management being in place an organization would have
trouble achieving its aims, or even coming up with aims in the first place! A classic
theory on the principles of management was written by Henri Fayol. It seeks to divide
management into 14 principles. We’ll take a look at these basic principles of
management and explain them in easy to understand terminology.

Principles of Management – Fayol’s 14 Principles

Division of Work – This principle of management is based on the theory that if workers
are given a specialized task to do, they will become skillful and more efficient in it than
if they had a broader range of tasks. Therefore, a process where everyone has a
specialized role will be an efficient one.

Authority – This principle looks at the concept of managerial authority. It looks at how
authority is necessary in order to ensure that managerial commands are carried out. If
managers did not have authority then they would lack the ability to get work carried out.
Managers should use their authority responsibly and ethically.

Discipline – This principle relates to the fact that discipline is needed within an
organization for it to run effectively. Organizational rules, philosophies, and structures


                                          948
need to be met. In order to have disciplined workers, managers must build a culture of
mutual respect and motivation.

Unity of command – There should be a clear chain of command in place within an
organization. An employee should know exactly whose instructions to follow.

Unity of direction – Work should be organized in a way that means employees are
working in harmony toward a shared objective or goal using a shared method or
procedure.

Subordination individual interests to the collective interests – The interests of the
organization as a whole should take precedence over the interests of any individual
employee or group of employees. This encourages a team spirit and collective mentality
of all for one and one for all.

Remuneration – In order to motivate and be fair to employees, they should be paid a
reasonable rate for the work they carry out. An organization that underpays will struggle
to attract quality workers who are motivated.

Centralization – This principle relates to whether decisions should be made centrally, as
in from the top down, or in a more democratic way, from the bottom up. Different
decision-making processes are appropriate for different types of decisions.

Scalar chain – This relates to the principle of a clear chain of communication existing
between employees and superiors. The chain should be respected, unless speedy
communication is vital, in which case the chain may be bypassed if all parties consent.

Order – This relates to the proper use of resources and their effective deployment in a
structured fashion.

Equity – Managers should behave ethically towards those they manage. Almost every
organization in the modern world will have a written set of policies and procedures
which will outline exactly what is expected from staff at all levels.

Stability of tenure of personnel – It is seen as desirable within an organization to have a
low staff turnover rate. This is due to the benefits that come with having experienced
staff and the time and expense needed to train new ones. There should be a clear and
efficient method of filling any staff vacancies that arise.

Initiative – Employees that have an input as to how to best do their job are likely to feel
more motivated and respected. Many organizations place a great deal of emphasis on
listening to the concerns of staff.
                                          949
Morale – Keeping a high level of morale and team spirit is an essential part of having
the most productive organization possible. Happy and motivated employees are far more
likely to be productive and less absent.

Management theories

There are two major but opposing schools of thought in management: scientific
management and the human relations–based approach. As its

The four main classifications of management:

• Classical Theories (Scientific Management)

• Human Relations or Behavioural Approach Theories • Systems Theories

• Contingency Theories



What is Classical Management Theory?

• Classical management theory involves creating multiple levels of workers to improve
productivity.

• Employees at the lowest levels find their tasks overseen by supervisors who, in turn,
are overseen by managers. At every level, employees are expected to perform tasks
according to specific procedures designed to maximize productivity.

• In addition, this theory focuses on an impersonal side of business. Employees and
managers should not allow friendliness and personal interactions to become involved
with the organization. Rules must be followed exactly, and the hiring and firing of
employees must relate only to the skills they possess

Classical Theories:

Scientific Approach to Management

The approach relied on systematic information collection, analysis and identification of
causes and effects, followed by effective organization o management structure.

The objective was to develop basic principles that could guide the design, creation and
maintenance of organizations. The emphasis was on efficiency and effectiveness. Some
of the prominent figures that may be identified with the classical school of thought are:
                                         950
1. Frederic W. Taylor

2. Henri Fayol

3. Max Weber



1. Frederic W. Taylor

Frederic W. Taylor, an engineer, was instrumental in conducting research on methods of
training workers for increased production. He believed in the principle ‘best
management is a true science’.

• According to Taylor the objective of management is to secure the maximum prosperity
for the employer, as well as each employee. Taylor's system for work improvement
consisted of the following steps:

• Observing the workers’ performance through time and motion to determine the best
way to carry out each task.

• Scientifically selecting the best worker to perform each job, that is, the person with the
characteristics and abilities needed to carry out tasks efficiently.

• Training the selected worker to perform tasks in the most efficient manner. •
Appointing a few highly skilled workers in managerial positions.

• Most of the views expressed by Taylor can be, and are, applied in nursing, where our
aim is to recruit the best qualified workers, train them and appoint them to precise
specialized positions.

• Scientifically selecting the best worker to perform each job, that is, the person with the
characteristics and abilities needed to carry out tasks efficiently.

• Training the selected worker to perform tasks in the most efficient manner.

• Appointing a few highly skilled workers in managerial positions.

• Most of the views expressed by Taylor can be, and are, applied in nursing, where our
aim is to recruit the best qualified workers, train them and appoint them to precise
specialized positions.
                                          951
2. Henri Fayol

• Henri Fayol came up with the functions of a manager, which he identified as planning,
organizing, coordinating and controlling. He also identified a set of fourteen principles
which managers might apply as they perform their duties. Some of these include the
division of labour and specialization, chain of command, centralization and
responsibility.

Fayol, Five Basic Functions Management

• Planning: Deciding what needs to happen in the future and generating plans for action
(deciding in advance).

• Organizing nonhuman

(or staffing): Making sure the human and resources are put into place

• Coordinating: Creating a structure through which an organization's goals can be
accomplished.

• Commanding (or leading): Determining what must be done in a situation and getting
people to do it.

• Controlling: Checking progress against plans

3. Max Weber

• Max Weber advocated bureaucracy as the ideal form of organization for a complex
institution. He described Bureaucracy as having a well defined hierarchy of authority,
pyramidal in shape, division of labour based on specialization and highly specific rules
governing employers’ duties and rights. He claimed that bureaucracy was superior
because it provided stability and reliability in controlling employees.

Although Weber meant well, the term bureaucracy implies slowness and inefficiency in
today’s society. Bureaucracies are often seen as too rigid to respond to current and rapid
changes in the society.

Behavioral Approach /Human Relations Theories

• Abraham Maslow's Theory

• Douglas McGregor: Theory x and Theory y • Vroom's Expectancy Theory

                                          952
• Fredrick Herzberg's Two Factor Theory

What is Human Relations Theory?

• Human relations theory, also known as behavioral management theory, focuses more
on the individuals in a workplace than the rules, procedures and processes. Instead of
directives coming directly from management, a human relations theory provides
communication between employees and managers, allowing them to interact with one
another to help make decisions. Instead of giving workers quotas and requiring certain
procedures, workers are exposed to motivational and emotional tactics to get them to
increase productivity. The focus of this style is creating fulfilled, productive workers and
helping workers invest in a company.

1. Abraham Maslow's Theory

• According to Maslow's theory, every human being has basic needs. People are
motivated by the desire to satisfy these needs. Once a need is satisfied it ceases to be a
motivator. As one need is satisfied, another appears and takes its place, and the individual
is then motivated to satisfy the new need.

The theory also assumes that a person can satisfy one need at a time. Maslow, a
psychologist, developed the hierarchy of needs with the physiological needs at the
bottom, which the individuals must satisfy before realising higher level needs. Maslow
visualised needs as arranged in hierarchical order starting with basic needs, progressing
to higher needs depending on the individual.

There are more people at the base of the triangle still trying to satisfy the basic needs and
fewer people were on the higher subsequent levels. Only a small percentage of people
can reach the top of the hierarchy.




                                           953
Figure 1: Showing Abraham Maslow's Theory




                                    954
Link:https://www.google.com/url?sa=i&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.simplypsycholog
y.org%2Fmaslow




                                  955
• The various needs can be further defined as follows:

• Physiological needs are those needs that are required for survival.These include food,
oxygen and sleep, sex and rest.

• Safety needs refer to the need for job security, shelter and a stable environment.

• Love and belonging indicate a need for affectionate relations with others as well as the
need to belong to a group.

• Self esteem refers to the need for self respect and recognition. At this stage people
strive for power, achievement and status.

• Self actualization is a need for self fulfilment and is the culmination of all other needs.

2. Douglas McGregor: Theory X and Theory Y

• McGregor's theory 'X' and 'Y' are a set of management assumptions about the behavior
of subordinates. He noted that most managers make these assumptions about their
employees.

• The first sets of assumption are known as Theory 'X’ they include:

• An average human being has an inherent dislike for work and will avoid it if possible.

• As a result of the assumption above, most people must be coerced, controlled, directed
and threatened with punishment in order to produce.

• The average human being has to be closely directed, wishes to avoid responsibility and
only wants security.

• The second set of assumptions known as Theory 'Y’ regard people in a more favorable
way. They state that:

• Employees like work, which is as natural as rest or play.

• Human beings do not have to be controlled or coerced as long as commitment to the
organisation is present.

                                           956
• Under proper conditions, they will not only accept but also seek responsibility.



3. Vroom’s Expectancy Theory of Motivation

• By Victor Vroom.

• It examines motivation from the perspective of why people choose to follow a particular
course of action.

Vroom introduces three variables: Valence, Expectancy & Instrumentality

i). Valence -positivity

• This is the importance that the individual places upon the expected outcome of a
situation.

Ii). Expectancy- effort

This is the belief that output from the individual and the success of the situation are
linked, for example, if I work harder then the outcome will be better

iii). Instrumentality- reward

• This is the belief that the success of the situation is linked to the expected outcome of
the situation, for example, it's gone really well, so I'd expect praise.

• At first glance, this theory would seem most applicable to a traditional attitude work
situation where the level of motivation depends on whether the employee wants the
reward on offer for doing a good job and whether they believe more effort will lead to
that reward.

• However, it could equally apply to any situation where someone does something
because they expect a certain outcome. For example, I recycle paper because I think it is
important to conserve resources and take a stand on environmental issues (valence), I
think that the more effort I put into recycling, the more paper I will recycle (expectancy)
and I think that the more paper I recycle, the less resources will be used (instrumentality

4. Fredrick Herzberg’s Two Factor Theory (Dual Structure Theory)



                                          957
• Frederick Herzberg proposed a theory of motivation based on the idea that some factors
motivate and some demotivate. He called this theory the ‘Two Factor Theory’.
According to Frederick Herzberg, these factors fall into two categories.

I.   Motivation Factors ii. Hygiene Factors

• what motivates workers and what demotivates them are two separate elements that act
independently of one another.

• Motivators, such as challenging work, recognition and responsibility, will lead to
increased satisfaction and commitment to the organization.

• Hygiene factors, such as salary, job security, supervisory practices and benefits, do not
actually motivate employees, but will demotivate them if they are poor or missing.

Hygiene Factors

• Hygiene factors are needed to ensure an employee does not become dissatisfied. They
do not lead to higher levels of motivation, but without them there is dissatisfaction.
Typical hygiene factors are:

• Interpersonal relationships • Work conditions

• Salary • Status

• Security

Motivation Factors

• Motivation factors are needed in order to motivate an employee into higher
performance.

These include:

• Achievement • Growth

• Responsibility for task • Interest in the job

Results in Four Scenarios

a. High Hygiene + High Motivation


                                           958
This is the ideal scenario where employees are highly motivated and have few
complaints.

b. High Hygiene + Low Motivation

In this scenario, employees have few complaints but are not highly motivated. The job
is perceived as a pay check.

c. Low Hygiene + High Motivation

In this scenario, employees are motivated but have a lot of complaints. This is a situation
where the job is exciting and challenging but salaries and work conditions are not up to
par.

d. Low Hygiene + Low Motivation

This is the worst situation where employees are unmotivated and have lots of complaints.

Systems Theory

• Unlike the previous theories, the theory places an emphasis on organizations as
cooperative systems.

• A system is defined as ‘a set of arrangements of things so related or connected as to
form a unit or organic whole’.

• The organization is, therefore, defined as ‘a system of consciously coordinated personal
activities or forces’ (Basawanthappa, 2000).

• The systems theory explains that organizations come into existence when there are
persons able to communicate with each other who will each contribute an action to
accomplish a purpose.

• Managers who understand systems theory recognize how different systems affect a
worker and how a worker affects the systems around them.

• A system is made up of a variety of parts that work together to achieve a goal. Systems
theory is a broad perspective that allows managers to examine patterns and events in the
workplace.

• This helps managers to coordinate programs to work as a collective whole for the
overall goal or mission of the organization rather than for isolated departments.

                                          959
For cooperation to be effective,

The following must be present: • Place where work is done

• Time when work is done

• Person with whom work is done • Things upon which work is done

• Method or process by which work is done

• This helps in understanding the organization in a better way.

Contingency Theory

• This theory asserts that managers make decisions based on the situation at hand rather
than a "one size fits all" method.

• A manager takes appropriate action based on aspects most important to the current
situation. Managers in a MTC may want to utilize a leadership approach that includes
participation from workers, while a leader in the army may want to use an autocratic
approach.

• The theory asserts that when managers make a decision, they must take into account
all aspects of the current situation and act on those aspects that are key to the situation
at hand.

• The continuing effort to identify the best leadership or management style might now
conclude that the best style depends on the situation.

• If one is leading troops in Somalia, an autocratic style is probably best; If one is leading
a hospital or College, a more participative and facilitative leadership style is probably
best

Self-assessment test

Traits leadership theories: -

a) Focuses on what leaders do in relational and contextual terms

b) Emphasizes on the degrees of trust and respect between leaders and followers

c) Is independent on personal characteristics of followers

                                           960
d) Emphasizes that physical and emotional characteristics are critical in inspiring others
toward a common goal

The process of working with and through others to achieve organizational objectives is
called

Administration

Leadership

Management

Team work

Short response questions

State the four (4) main classification of management theories

Practical test

Using a diagram, demonstrate hierarchy of human needs by Abraham Maslow



References

Louis A. Allen, Management and Organization, McGraw-Hill Kogakusha, Ltd.

Read more: An Introduction to the Principles of Management - Principles Of
Management                              -                       StateUniversity.com
https://education.stateuniversity.com/pages/cw1ev9e9ib/An-Introduction-to-the-
Principles-of-Management.html#ixzz6gbTXQTt2

Link:https://www.google.com/url?sa=i&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.verywellmind.co
m%2Fwhat-is-maslows-hierarchy-of-needs-4136760&psig=AOvVaw0Tm-
nXIOioh1DPT3EdHzb1&ust=1608037931433000&source=images&cd=vfe&ved=2ah
UKEwjzvOOexs3tAhXa4YUKHVZjC8kQr4kDegUIARDQAQ




                                          961
2.1 Learning outcome 2: Peri operation Theatre resources

  Introduction to the learning outcome

  Upon completion of this unit, the trainees should be able to demonstrate knowledge,
  skills and attitude on Staffing procedures/recruitment procedures, Resource allocation
  Organization structure/protocol, Communication methods and Ethics in PT

  Performance Standard

     1. PT activities are identified and classified according to Standard Management
        Procedures & work place policy
     2. PT duties are assigned and allocated appropriate resources according to Standard
        Management Procedures, WHO and work place policy
     3. Responsibilities and authority in PT is delegated and co-ordinated according to
        Standard Management Procedures, WHO and work place policy

  Definition of terms

  Job area: Any subunit of a workforce sector, such as a department, job group, job title,
  etc.

  Job description: A written statement detailing the duties of a particular job title.

  Job group: Job or group of jobs having similar content, wage rates, and opportunities.

  Content/Procedures/methods/illustrations

  Human Resource Management

  The shift in terminology from ‘personnel’ to ’human resources’ is symbolic of a true
  change in the field. The term human resource reflects the position that people are a
  resource that needs to be managed strategically in support of the organisation’s mission.

  The effective functioning of an organisation depends upon various resources. Human
  resources or manpower is one of the most vital resources for the labour intensive health
  institution.

  Human resource management can be said to be an integral part of the role of any person
  who is responsible for the work of others. In this module, human resource management
  will refer to a group of specialists concerned with increasing the effectiveness of staff
  performance in operating theatre.

                                            962
According to Basawanthappa (2002), the main objectives of human resource
management are:

Effective utilisation of human resources to enable the achievement of

organisational goals.

Establishment and maintenance of an adequate organisational structure and desirable
working relationship among staff.

Securing integration of the individual and informal groups with the organisation and
thereby ensuring their commitment, involvement and loyalty.

Recognition and satisfaction of individual needs and group goals.

Provision of maximum opportunities for individual development and advancement.

Maintenance of high morals in organisations.

 Bearing in mind the objectives covered previously, you will now look at the main
aspects of human resource management. These include:

Forecasting Future Manpower Requirements

This involves estimating the institution’s demand for labour and matching this with what
is available.

Formulating and Proposing Policies

Formulation of human resource policies is done by the human resource management
department. The policies have to be agreed upon by top management. The key areas of
personnel policy include recruitment and selection, terms and conditions of employment,
training and development as well as labour union issues, for example, laid down
procedures on how to handle strikes and disputes. These personnel policies are
guidelines for behaviour and state how the organisation will respond in relation to
employee affairs.

Financial Resource Management

In the previous section, you covered the management of human resources. In this part,
you are going to examine financial


                                         963
resource management. Managing finances is one of the most important roles of a theatre
technician manager. Arguments have been put forward that this function should be left
to accountants who are specialised in this area. However, if theatre technician do not
have the basic skills to enable them manage finances, they will not succeed in providing
nursing services. Most of the resources you will be managing are acquired with money.

Financial planning requires that the manager identifies objectives, policies and
procedures. The budget is one of the main tools of financial management.

Managing Time

Time is an important resource although in many cases, it is not thought of as such. It is
sometimes referred to as one of the M’s of management and stands for moments. The
other M’s being money, manpower and materials. For example, you may recall times
when you have wished that a day had more than twenty four hours or that a week had
more than seven days so that you can accomplish the tasks you had set out to do. This
often happens when you are not managing time well.

Equipment Used in Theatre

You are now going to look at the equipment that is normally used during an operation.

Ligatures and Sutures

A suture is a stitch or series of stitches used in surgery to bring together living tissues
until the normal healing process takes place. A ligature is a suture used for tying blood
vessels to arrest bleeding.

There are two types of sutures. They can be absorbable, which means they dissolve in
the tissue after some time, for example, catgut. They can also be non-absorbable, which
means that the body tissue cannot digest the material used, for example, silkworm gut,
nylon, cotton, linen, silk and metal.

The latter must be removed when the wound is healed. Metal clips are also available and
are used in neuro-surgery to compress nerve endings, and also on skin incision to give
a good grip. Traumatic sutures are used together with a needle for suturing the skin.
Ligatures are lengths of suture material used without a needle to tie a blood vessel in
order to control or arrest bleeding. Most ligatures are non-absorbable, for example, those
made of linen, cotton, silk, polyester, wire and clips. Absorbable include chromic catgut.
Metal clips can be used as ligatures.



                                          964
Cutting needles, which have a sharp edge, cut a crack as they pass, and are used on strong
tissues, for example, skin, tendon, muscles.

Surgical Needles

These are made from plated carbon steel or stainless steel. The different parts of a needle
are the eye, shaft, and point. The needle is either straight or curved. There are different
classes of needles. These include:

Round bodied needles

Cutting needles, which have a sharp edge, cut a crack as they pass, and are used on strong
tissues, for example, skin,

tendon, muscles.

Atraumatic needles

Round bodied needles, which are round and smooth, cause less damage and make a
puncture. They are used in delicate tissues and organs.

Cutting needles

Atraumatic needles, which are either cutting or round bodied whose traumatising chance
is minimal. These needles have no eye. Suture and needles are made joined-together.




Figure 2: Layout of an Operating Theatre




                                          965
Adapted from internet



The theatre unit is a block of buildings with a series of rooms leading off a corridor with
closed doors, which separate it from the main hospital.

The doors reduce unnecessary movement to and from theatre. A theatre should be built
in a central place possibly near an intensive care unit, the surgical wards and other special
wards, for example, renal unit and burns unit.

All these units should be in relation to each other, but construction should be separate
and independent from all traffic and air movement within the hospital.

A theatre unit is self contained with changing rooms, shower rooms, toilets, anaesthetic
room, operating room, cleaning room,at least four beds, sluice room, linen room and
sterilising room.

Inside the theatre, the walls, floor and roof are built with labour saving materials for
hygiene purposes. It has artificial ventilators, efficient artificial lights and emergency
systems for use during power failure. The theatre furnishings and fittings are made of
stainless materials for quick and thorough cleaning.

All the trolleys are fitted with non-electricity conducting rubbers to minimise the risk of
electric conduction. The doors and corridors are wide and high for easy movement. The
ceilings are high enough for proper theatre ventilation.
                                           966
PHYSICAL LAYOUT THE OPERATING ROOM

An operation theatre is the "heart" of any major hospital. An operating theatre, operating
room, surgery suite or a surgery centre is a room within a hospital within which surgical
and other operations are carried out.

OT are designed and built to carry out investigative, diagnostic, therapeutic and palliative
procedures of varying degrees of invasiveness. Many such setups are customized to the
requirements based on size of hospital, patient turnover and may be speciality specific.

The aim is to provide the maximum benefit for maximum number of patients arriving to
the operation theatre. Both the present as well as future needs should be kept in mind
while planning OT.

OT design

Several basic design types are used in surgical services departments, depending on the
age of the facility and the physical design of the areas outside the department. All surgery
departments are designed with the idea of controlling traffic patterns and quickly
providing each operating room (OR) with the necessary supplies during and after each
case, while keeping clean and contaminated traffic patterns separate.

Most surgical suites are constructed according to a variation of one or more basic
designs. The basic designs are:

•    Central corridor plan – these plans are two types

•    Racetrack plan - In this design, the front entrance to each OR is from the outer
corridor, and supplies are retrieved through a rear entrance to the room leading to the
central-core storage and work areas.



•     Hotel plan - In this design, the ORs are situated along a central corridor, with
separate clean core and soiled work areas. The primary difference in this plan is that all
traffic enters and exits the surgery department through a single entrance or a primary
entrance and holding area entrance situated along the same corridor.




                                          967
•    Peripheral corridor - In this design, the front entrance to each OR is from the
peripheral corridor, and supplies are retrieved through a rear entrance from the OR
leading to the central-core storage and work areas.



•    Specialty grouping plan - The "specialty grouping" plan is simply a variation on the
hotel or race track plan, in which ORs are grouped by specialty (e.g., neurosurgery,
general surgery), each with its own closely associated clean storage areas and, in some
cases, each with its own soiled instrument work area.

The design of any surgery department revolves around environmental control, traffic
control, and the desire to prevent surgical site infection (SSI). Such factors as the
separation of clean and soiled work areas and areas of the department specified as
restricted and unrestricted assist in the promotion of this idea. Efficiency is increased
with strategic placement of computers, preparation areas, and staff areas.

Different Zones/ Areas

Regardless of the design chosen by the facility, certain principles apply universally.
Traffic control follows predetermined traffic patterns that all persons entering the
department are expected to follow. The OR department is divided into four zones based
on varying degrees of cleanliness, in which the bacteriological count progressively
diminishes from the outer to the inner zones (operating area) and is maintained by a
differential decreasing positive pressure ventilation gradient from the inner zone to the
outer zone.

1.   Unrestricted zone or clean area.

2.   Semi restricted zone or sub sterile area

3.   Restricted zone or sterile area

4.   Disposal zone or area

1.   Unrestricted/ Clean zone or clean area

•    This is the area where hospital personnel, OT personnel, patient's & their attendants
can move about in street clothes.

•    Connects protective zone to aseptic zone and has other areas also like


                                          968
•    Stores & cleaner room

•    Equipment store room

•    Maintenance workshop

•    Kitchenette (pantry)

•    Firefighting device room

•    Emergency exits

•    Service room for staff

•    Close circuit TV control area

1.   Semi restricted/ Protective zone or sub-sterile area

•   After changing from street clothes, with clean gown, cap & OT slipper, the OT
team or personnel are, enter in this area. (Operating room attire is required)

•    It includes -

•    Change rooms for all medical and paramedical staff with conveniences

•    Transfer bay for patient, material & equipment's

•    Rooms for administrative staff

•    Stores & records

•    Pre & post-operative rooms

•    I.C.U. and P.A.C.U.

•    Sterile stores

1.   Restricted/Aseptic zone or sterile area:

•    This zone has operation theatres & operation room where operations are done.




                                         969
•    This is a place where staff & patients in street clothes & shoes are not allowed to
enter. Scrubbed personnel wear sterile gowns & gloves & get ready for operation
procedure. (Operating room attire is required)

1.   Disposal zone or area

•    Dirty utility area

•    Disposal corridor

•    OT attire mandatory in this area

Advantages of zoning

•    Minimizes risk of hospital infection.

•    Minimizes unproductive movement of staff, supplies & patient.

•    Increases efficacy of operative team members.

•    Ensures smooth workflow.

•    Deceases hazards in operating room.

•    Ensures proper positioning of equipment's.

Sub areas

•     Nurses station or counter - Nurses station is an area where nurses and other health
care staff sit behind when not working directly with patients and can perform some of
their duties. The station has a counter that can be approached by visitors and patients
who wish to receive attention from the nurses. It should be spacious enough to allow two
or more personnel to work together.

•    Pre-operative check area (reception) - It is the area where OT nursing personnel
receive patients. Here patients and his records are checked.

•    Holding area - This area is planned for IV line insertion, preparation, catheter /
gastric tube insertion, connection of monitors, & shall have O2 and suction lines. Facility
for CPR should be available in this area.

•    Induction/Anaesthetic room - It should have all facilities as in OT, but there is
controversy as to its need. It should provide space for anaesthetic trolleys and equipment
                                          970
and should be located with direct access to circulation corridors and ready access to the
operating room. It will also allow cleaning, testing and storing of anaesthesia equipment.
It should have sufficient power outlets and medical gas panels for testing of equipment.




Figure 3: Operating theatre room,from internet




Adapted                    from                 the                    internet
https://www.google.com/url?sa=i&url=https%3A%2F%2Frajnursing.blogspot.com%2
F2018%2F09%2Fphysical-layout-operating



•     Post anaesthetic care units (PACU)/Post–operative or recovery room – Room
where patients are kept & cared until they are out of anaesthesia & until their vital signs
become stable. These should contain a medication station, hand washing station, nurse
station, storage space for stretchers, supplies and monitors / equipment and gas, suction
outlets and ventilator.

•    Staff room – Men and women change dress from street cloth to OT attire; lockers
and lavatory are essential; rest room etc. are desirable.



                                          971
•    Sanitary facility for staff- One washbasin and one western closet (WC) should be
provided for 8-10 persons. Showers and their number is a matter of local decision.
Inclusion of toilet facilities in changing rooms is not acceptable; they should be located
in an adjacent space.

•    Offices – for staff nurse and anaesthesia staff- The office should allow access to
both unrestricted and semi-restricted areas as frequent communication with public is
needed.

•   Rest rooms- Pleasant and quiet rest for staff should be arranged either as one large
room for all grades of staff or as separate rooms; both have merits. Comfortable chairs,
one writing table, a book case etc., may be arranged.

•    Laboratory – Small laboratory with refrigerator for pathologist to be arranged.

•     Seminar room- Since staff cannot leave an OT easily, it is better to have a seminar
room within the OT. Intra-departmental discussions, teaching and training sessions for
staff (with audio-visual aids) may be conducted here.

•    Store room-

•    These rooms should have steel cabinets & separate for specific items.

•     These cabinets should be spacious enough to accommodate various items such as
sterile linens, sterile trays, sterile drums with sponges, dressings, cotton swabs,
bandages, sterile rubber sheets, catheters, sutures, syringes, infusion & transfusion sets.

•    A separate store room is needed for unsterile, clean articles such as linen, OT dress
items, stainless steel equipment's

•    The cabinets of store rooms should be made up of such materials which can be
cleaned & washed without being damaged.

•    There should be bigger store room for equipment's such as monitoring devices,
suction apparatus, O2 cylinder, trolleys, wheel chairs, stretchers, defibrillator, pace
makers, bed urinals, OT slippers etc.

•    Scrub room- This is planned to be built within the restricted area. This should be
spacious. Sometime s two or three operation theatres can share one scrub facility. Scrub
area should have deep & wide shink to avoid splash of water on the surrounding area.
There should be facilities for running water. The taps should be such that they could be
opened or closed by foot pedals or they have long handles that can be operate by elbows.

                                          972
•     Waiting room – Patient's attendants or family member's waiting room with attached
toilet & drinking water facility.

•    Visitor's gallery - Gallery from where the visitors can see the operative procedures
being performed.

•     Utility Room - This is also called clean up room where instruments, articles, gloves
are received following surgical procedures. Here all these are cleaned, washed & wiped
dry & then wrapped, stored & sent for sterilization.

•    Disposal or sluice room - This room receives all soiled linen & dressing. Here all
disposable items are separated according to biochemical waste management code & then
packed in leak proof containers. The soiled linens are sent to the laundry. The OT set up
should be such that it should be possible to dispose off soiled items without taking them
through sub-sterile or sterile areas.

OPERATING ROOM

NUMBER & SIZE

•    The number & size can be as per the requirement.

•    The standard OT should be rectangular or square in shape and similar in design.

•    It should be 20×20×10 feet in size so it provides a floor space of 400 Sq. feet
approx.

•     It should be spacious enough to allow free movement of personnel, trolleys,
stretchers, wheel chairs, monitoring devices, portable x-ray machines etc.

•     Cardiac or neurosurgery OT should be bigger in size of 20x30x10 feet with 600 sq.
feet floor space.

•    OT for endoscopy or minor surgery can be of small size of 18x18x10 feet with a
floor space of 324 sq. feet.

DOORS

•    Main door to the OT suite has to be of adequate width (1.2 to 1.5 m).

•    The doors of each OT should be spring loaded flap type, but sliding doors are
preferred as no air currents are generated.

                                          973
•    All fittings in OT should be flush type and made of steel.

SURFACE / FLOORING

•    The surface / flooring must be slip resistant, strong with minimum joints.

•   It should be easily washable, free as possible joints, seams so that they do not
permits adherence of bacteria or dust particles containing microorganism.

•    It should be able to withstand repeated washing with germicidal agents.

•    It should be able to absorb sound.

•     The colour of the flooring should be such that if a needle is dropped on the floor it
is visible.

WALLS

•   The walls, ceiling & floor surfaces should be made of hard fire resistant, smooth,
non-porous material.

•    It should be light in colour (light blue or green) and washable paint should be ideal.

•    Colour of paint should allow reflection of light and yet soothing to eyes.

•    Adequate electric points should be available on the wall at < 1.5 m height from the
floor.

SCRUB STATION

•    For sterile hand wash

•    Types: Stainless/ Granite/Marble/ Cement

•    Gradient of basin forward and downwards

•    Gradient towards outlet

•    Hot water mixing: automatic or manual

•    Non splashing taps; possible to change direction

•    Elbow/ Foot or Infra-Red operated taps
                                          974
•    Soap dispenser: Manual/automatic

•    to be planned for at least for 2-3 persons in each OT.




VENTILATION, TEMPERATURE & HUMIDITY

•   The OT Require Efficient ventilation that will control temperature and humidity in
OT and dilute the contamination by microorganisms and anaesthetic agents.

•    The ventilation in OT should follow the principles that the direction of airflow
should take place from the sterile to the clean zone & form the clean zone to the less
clean areas.

•   There should be no open window in the OT and sliding doors of the OT should be
open from the OT towards the sub sterile zone.

•    There should be no interchange air movement between one OT and another.

•    There should be no circulating fan or cross ventilation to prevent airborne
contamination of the surgical wound.

•    An effective ventilation system is necessary to exchange the air. This air is filtered
with an efficient air filtering system.

•    There are two types of air conditioning systems: recirculating and non recirculating.

•    The circulating system takes some or all of the air, adjusts the temperature and
circulates air back to the room.

•    Non-recirculating systems heat / cool the air as desired and convey it into the
operating room with ideally 20-air exchange per hour. Air is then exhausted to outside.
Anaesthetic agents in the OT air are also automatically removed. These are thus ideal
but are expensive.

•    The broad recommendations include:

•    20-30 air exchanges / hour for recirculated air


                                          975
•    Only up to 80% recirculation of air to prevent build-up of anaesthetic and other
gases

•   Ultraclean laminar airflow – the filtered air delivery must be 90% efficient in
removing particles more than 0.5m m.

•  Positive air pressure system in OT: It should ensure a positive pressure of 5 cm
H2O from ceiling of OT downwards and outwards, to push out air from OT.

•    Relative humidity of 50-60% to be maintained

•    Temperature between 18o-24oC. Temperature should not be adjusted for the
comfort of OT personnel but for the requirement of patient, especially in paediatric,
geriatric, burns, neonatal cases etc.




LIGHTING

Figure 4 showing the diagram of surgical lights




                                        976
Adapted from the internet

https://www.google.com/url?sa=i&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.surgicalledlights.com%
2Fsale-11200111-5000k-220v-led-operation-theatre-lights-140000-lux-surgical-
operating-light.



The general room illumination the OT is provided by fluorescent lamps (surface ceiling
mounted) to produce even illumination of at least 500 Lux at working height, with
minimal glare are preferred.

•     This contrast should be maintained in corridors and scrub areas, as well as in the
room itself, so that the surgeon becomes accustomed to the light before entering the
sterile field.

•    To minimize eye fatigue, the ratio of intensity of general room lighting to that at
the surgical site should not exceed 1:5, preferably 1:3.

•    Colour and hue of the lights also should be consistent.

•    The surgical or operation light should be an overhead ceiling mounted unit.
                                         977
•    The overhead operating light must:

•    Overhead light should be near daylight in colour and shadow less and give25000-
125000 Lux of light (50000 to 100000 Lux at the centre and at least 15000 Lux at the
periphery).

•    Give contrast to the depth and relationship of all anatomic structures. The light may
be equipped with an intensity control mechanism. The surgeon may ask for more light
when needed therefore a reserve light should be available (e.g. a mobile operation light).

•   Provide the diameter light pattern of a focus appropriate for the size of the incision.
These are adjusted with controls mounted on the light fixture.

•     Be freely adjustable to any position or angle. Most overhead operating lights are
ceiling mounted on mobile fixtures. It can be positioned so that light is directed into a
single incision or two concurrent operative sites.

•    Be spark-proof where anaesthetic gases are used.

•    Produce minimum heat to prevent injury to exposed tissues, to ensure the comfort
of the sterile team, and to minimize airborne microorganisms.

•    Be easily cleaned. Tracks recessed within the ceiling virtually eliminate dust
accumulation. The radiant heat produced by the light should raise the tissue temperature
not more than 2oC.

EMERGENCY SIGNAL

•     The OT management committee should consider installing an alarm system in case
of a life-threatening emergency.

•    The activation of this alarm will save valuable time to mobilize the emergency
designate staff and direct them to the site of the emergency.

OTHER FACILITIES OF OR

•    Electric generator - OT department should have electric generator to ensure
uninterrupted electricity supply in case of electricity failure.

•    O2 supply & suction system - OT should have piped in O2 supply through central
O2 supply system from a central source. There should also be central suctioning through
piped in suction arrangement.

                                          978
•    Music system - Operation theatre can also have a soft music system. Music creates
a pleasant environment for patients & staff. Music also provide diversion of the patient's
mind. Music can provide relaxation to pts who undergo surgery under local, regional or
spinal anaesthesia. It also provide a soothing atmosphere & decreases tension & fatigue
of the OT staff.

•Computer terminal - The modern OT construction also provide a surface area for the
computer terminal in each OT. These computers are being used to record & maintain
patient information.




Resource mobilization

What is Resource Mobilization and Why is it so Important?

What is resource mobilization in theatre?

Resource mobilization refers to all activities involved in securing new and additional
resources for your organization. It also involves making better use of, and maximizing,
existing resources. Resource mobilization is often referred to as ‘New Business
Development’. The figure below shows how New Business Opportunities – which are
intended to mobilize resources – form part of an organization’s overall functioning.

Why is resource mobilization so important?

Resource mobilization is critical to any organization for the following reasons:

1.   Ensures the continuation of your organization’s service provision to clients

2.   Supports organizational sustainability

3. Allows for improvement and scale-up of products and services the organization
currently provides

4. Organizations, both in the public and private sector, must be in the business of
generating new business to stay in business
                                          979
What is meant by sustainability?

Although sustainability is often identified with having sufficient funds to cover an
organization’s activities, it is actually a broader concept. There are three fundamental
streams of sustainability: institutional, financial and programmatic. Each is vital to the
survival of an organization. Below are the definitions of these three areas of
sustainability:

Programmatic sustainability. The organization delivers products and services that
respond to clients’ needs and anticipates new areas of need. Its success enables
expansion of its client base.

Institutional sustainability. The organization has a strong, yet flexible structure and
accountable, transparent governance practices. Its structure and good governance allows
it to respond to the shifting priorities of its supporters and to new responsibilities toward
its clients, while creating a positive work climate for its staff.

Financial sustainability. The organization draws on various sources of revenue, allowing
it to support its ongoing efforts and to undertake new initiatives.




Staffing Process

Staffing involves hiring and retaining staff in an organisation.

The staffing process involves a situation analysis, looking into what you want and whom
you can get. It includes:

•    Recruitment

•    Selection

                                           980
•    Induction

•    Scheduling

Recruitment

This is the first part of the process and it involves filling a vacancy. It includes the
examination of the vacancy and consideration of sources of suitable candidates. The
sources could be internal, that is, from within the organisation, or external.

Selection

This is the next stage, it includes assessing the candidate by various means, for example,
interviewing and making a choice between candidates to be followed by an offer of
employment. If no suitable candidates are found, the post is advertised again with a wider
scope or catchment area. This may include advertising abroad.

During selection, at least the three best candidates are chosen.

In case the best candidate is not in a position to take the job, then the second best is
approached until the vacancy is filled.

Scheduling (Duty Roster)

Figure 5: Sample of duty roster




                                          981
From                                                               internet
https://www.google.com/url?sa=i&url=https%3A%2F%2Fsetupmyhotel.com%2Fform
ats%2Ffo%2F181-hotel-staff-duty-roster-chart



After the orientation is done, the employee is assigned tasks to be performed. Work
schedules and time off should meet organisational goals with fairness and equity among
personnel. A schedule should adhere to the following:

•    Policies, standards and practices of the organisation on the hours worked by
professional and support staff.

•    Appropriate ratio or balance between professional and support staff.

•    Continuity of nursing services and twenty four hour coverage.

•    Approved budget.
                                        982
•    Consideration of vacations.

•   Allowance of adjustment in case of illness, emergencies or changes in patient care
needs.

•    Individual needs of staff.

Staff members should be informed of their work schedules at least one to two weeks in
advance.

The schedules may be either centralised or decentralised.

A centralised schedule is controlled by the chief nurse, matron or a designate who
develops a master plan for nursing personnel in the hospital. One of the advantages of
this method is that it provides an overall picture of the staffing situation in the
organisation. However, it denies the manager the right to make scheduling decisions
based on workers' abilities and needs. In the decentralised schedule, the middle and
lower levels of management determine scheduling, for example, ward in charges. The
manager is, therefore, more accountable at their level and has a greater control of
activities.

Factors Affecting Staffing

There are many variables that may affect staff numbers and placement.

These include:

The need to provide nursing services

•   Staff factors, for example, job descriptions, education level of staff, experience and
expectations from the organisation.

•   Patient factors, including variety of patient conditions, length of stay, the patient
population, care needs and fluctuation in numbers.

•    Health care organisation factors, including policies and procedures, financial
resources available, number of beds per unit, staffing norms, issues of professional
coverage and nursing assignment systems.

Since each setting is unique, there is no guide that can stipulate the correct number of
personnel needed to provide quality care. However, systems have been developed for
guidance, for example, the patient classification system which is a method of grouping

                                          983
patients according to the amount and complexity of their nursing care requirements. In
this case, patients are grouped according to the nursing time, effort and ability required
to provide care.



Organising

 Nurses work in organisations. Nurse managers are expected to organise their work
activities based on the staffing patterns. Organising is the process of grouping the
necessary responsibilities and activities into workable units, determining the lines of
authority, communication, developing patterns of coordination and giving feedback. By
organising, you are attempting to answer the question:

How will the work be divided and accomplished?

To answer the question, the manager must define groups and assign duties. There are
certain basic issues to consider:

•    Set up structure, that is, the structured aspects of the organisation that must be set
up to indicate activities to be performed and lines of responsibility

and authority.

•    Develop procedures and policies.

•    Determine requirements and decide how duties will be performed.

Resource allocation

Financial Resource Management

In the previous section, you covered the management of human resources. In this part,
you are going to examine financial resource management. Managing finances is one of
the most important roles of a nurse manager. Arguments have been put forward that this
function should be left to accountants who are specialised in this area. However, if nurses
do not have the basic skills to enable them manage finances, they will not succeed in
providing nursing services. Most of the resources you will be managing are acquired
with money.

Financial planning requires that the manager identifies objectives, policies and
procedures. The budget is one of the main tools of financial management.

                                          984
Budgeting

In simple terms, budgeting involves managing money and how it is used to maintain
other resources.

A budget is a means of control, which reflects the plan against which actual performance
is measured. It can also be defined as a means of checking the progress made in keeping
the expenses and costs in compliance with an organisation's financial plans. Budgeting
is the process of planning and controlling future operations by comparing actual results
with planned budgetary expectations.

The following are some of the purposes of a budget:

•    To avoid spending more than an organisation can afford

•    To aid in planning and controlling

•    To assist in assessing the financial requirements of the institution

•    To indicate the areas in which money raised or received will be spent

•    To facilitate comparison of actual performance with budgeted targets

In order to draw up a meaningful budget, the hospital should have a clearly defined
organisational structure with responsibilities defined and assigned. Personnel at all levels
of management should participate in budget development. The personnel involved
should have an understanding of the ideas and financial goals of the hospital.

There must be an adequate system, which provides reliable financial and statistical
information to the responsible people. The budget should allow enough freedom to
accomplish departmental objectives and must be flexible enough to allow for
unpredictable expenditures.

There are two main types of budgets, which the nurse may be involved

in preparing:

•    Operational or Annual Budget

•    Capital Budget

                                          985
Operational or Annual Budget

This is the organisation's statement of expected revenue or income and expenses for the
coming year. It coincides with the fiscal year. The fiscal year is a specified twelve month
period during which the operational and financial performance of the organisation is
measured. It usually coincides with the calendar year, that is, it runs from January to
December or may follow another time frame, for example, the government calendar,
which runs from July to June.

The operational budget includes the accumulated estimates of operating revenues and
expenses. In nursing management, the revenue is derived from patient fees. Actual
payment is generated by a given service or procedure.

The expenses consist of salary and non salary items, for example, personnel emoluments
and education, including in service training, on the job training, educational leave and
travel scholarships. They may also include personnel uniforms, books, periodical
subscriptions, laundry, medical equipment and maintenance, drugs and pharmaceuticals,
non pharmaceutical supplies, legal and professional fees and stationery.

The expenses should be comprehensive and thorough. Budgets are prepared by the heads
of each ward or department in consultation with staff. Thereafter, the matron, chief nurse
or director of nursing services compiles the nursing division budget. In some cases, the
director of nursing services prepares a budget for the whole of the nursing division.

As you can see from the figure, the income and expenditure parts of the budget have the
same totals, that is, they balance. A budget that has a higher income than expenditure is
said to show a surplus while the one with a higher expenditure shows a deficit. If there
is a deficit in the budget, it means you have spent more money than you have. This may
require you to borrow money or be indebted to your suppliers.

Capital Budget

This is the second type of budget. It outlines the need for major equipment or physical
changes in the organisation requiring large sums of money, for example, physical
renovations, new construction and new or replacement equipment. Organisations define
capital items based on certain criteria, for instance, the item must have an expected
performance of a minimum of one year or more and exceed a certain shilling value, for
example, fifty thousand. The criteria vary from one hospital to another.

Requests for capital items are usually made on a special form or letter, accompanied by
a written justification for the item. If there are a large number of items requested, a
priority list should be set.
                                          986
Where possible, the period within which items are needed should

be specified. Capital costs should consider long

term goals and must complement the organisational objectives.

All nurse managers are involved in the budgeting process.

Preparation begins several months before the end of the fiscal year to allow time for
careful preparation. In a decentralised system, budget preparation has several steps:

•    Review of policies, standards and objectives.

•    Top level management projections for the future and preparation of guidelines.

•    Middle level nurse managers prepare the annual budget.

•   The administrator of nursing services, finance director or manager reviews the
budget.

•    Budget is accepted or modified.

•    Budget is implemented and regularly evaluated.

Capital Budget

As you can see from the figure, the income and expenditure parts of the budget have the
same totals, that is, they balance. A budget that has a higher income than expenditure is
said to show a surplus while the one with a higher expenditure shows a deficit. If there
is a deficit in the budget, it means you have spent more money than you have. This may
require you to borrow money or be indebted to your suppliers.

Managing Materials

So far you have managed human resources and money. The other resource that a manager
is concerned with in the organisation is the materials. Materials refer to drugs, supplies
and equipment needed by the nurses and other health personnel to deliver services.

For quality and efficient services, the materials must be provided at the right place, at
the right time and in the right quantity.




                                          987
Materials are essential if the health care institution is to achieve its objectives. The nurse
manager should know the policies and procedures that relate to materials management.
You should be familiar with the following activities:

Demand Estimation

Since a large quantity of materials is used in hospitals, you need to identify your
requirements or needs beforehand.

Procurement

Having developed your list of requirements, the next step is procurement or ordering.

Some institutions have laid out specific rules and regulations regarding procurement.
This is aimed at reducing wastage and maximising the value of money.

Receipt and Inspection

The materials received should be subjected to either physical or chemical inspection.
This ensures that you received the right quality and quantity of materials as requested by
the organisation.

Inventory Control

Adequate quantities of materials should be available

whenever required. Close supervision of movement of materials or consumption rate is
a good tool for proper control.

Storage

The materials should be placed in a store within or near the institution. The store should
be of adequate size to accommodate all the different materials required, for example,
fridges, shelves and cupboards.

The materials should also be stored in appropriate conditions, for example, temperature,
light as specified by the manufacturer.

It is, therefore, important that the nurse manager adopts the proper procedures for
materials management.

Managing Time

                                           988
Time is an important resource although in many cases, it is not thought of as such. It is
sometimes referred to as one of the M’s of management and stands for moments. The
other M’s being money, manpower and materials. For example, you may recall times
when you have wished that a day had more than twenty four hours or that a week had
more than seven days so that you can accomplish the tasks you had set out to do. This
often happens when you are not managing time well.

The demands on time as a manager and a health care provider fall into three categories
(Nduba 1999):

•     Tasks that have to be performed. These relate to key responsibilities, for example,
clinical or administrative duties.

•   Tasks that other people pressurise you into doing. Some of these are important and
must be done while others you do because you do not want to say no.

•    Tasks that you perform because you want to.

These are usually out of choice and include tasks that someone else could do just as well,
for example, attending a nurses' association meeting.

Time Waster

This is something that prevents a person from accomplishing a job or achieving a goal.
Some of the common time wasters include:

•    Interruptions such as telephone calls and drop in visitors.

•    Lack of clear cut goals, objectives and priorities.

•    Meetings both scheduled and unscheduled.

•    Lack of daily or weekly plans.

•    Lack of self discipline.

•    Failure to delegate.

•    Ineffective communication.

•    Inability to say no.

Principles of Time Management
                                          989
The following are techniques that you can use to deal with time management constraints.

Goal Setting

The nurse manager sets both organisational and

personal goals. The goals are either short or long term and provide direction and vision
for actions as well as time frames in which activities will be accomplished.

Time Analysis

The manager should conduct a survey of how they spend a day. Reviewing the daily
schedule and keeping it accurate may demonstrate how time is used.

Priority Setting

The nurse manager identifies time frames for achievement of goals. The ’to do’ list
should be prioritised by classifying activities as ’one’ for urgent, ’two’ for not urgent but
important and ’three’ for less important.

Delegation

The nurse manager can delegate those activities that can be effectively handled by
juniors.

Controlling Interruptions

The nurse manager should identify causes of interruption and plan to reduce them. One
way of doing this is incorporating some of these interruptions into planned and scheduled
activities.

Nurse managers must use time wisely to accomplish everything that is expected of them.
This takes a lot of planning.

By now you should be able to manage resources within the organisation. However, in
the current health care system, there are a lot of changes including social, technological
and educational, which a nurse manager should be able to respond to and manage.
According to the theory of evolution, plants and animals have survived countless
changes in the

earth's environment. For example, the cockroach has been around for three hundred
million years and the shark two hundred million years. This is because they have learnt

                                           990
how to adapt to their environment.They have learnt how to survive. The strong survive
and the weak die, it is survival for the fittest.

Change has always been, and will always be, a part of us. During your lifetime you must
have experienced change in one form or the other, such as moving from one workstation
to another, acquisition of new skills or introduction of new methods of nursing care
delivery.

Change is the process of making something different from what it was. Change is
inevitable and nurse managers should understand and anticipate the reactions to change.



Figure 6: Organization structure/protocol Organizational Chart for Division




Figure 7: advantages of grouping OT as a management system




                                        991
Communication methods

Organisational Communication

In units one and two of module one, you covered the various principles of
communication. Please refer to your notes on this topic, as they will be useful for the
following topic. In this section, you will specifically focus on organisational
communication. There is no organisation that can exist without communication.

Communication is referred to as the lifeblood of any organisation. Communication refers
to the need to create

common understanding. It is, therefore, the process of transmitting ideas and information
from one person, the sender, to another or group of people, receivers.

Organisational communication is the exchange of information withinthe organisation.
While employee communication is the responsibility of the manager, the manager’s
work may be supplemented through some already established means of communication
within an organisation.

The manager is charged with the responsibility of passing information through various
channels.

Figure 8: Showing communication channels




Formal and Informal Communication

The formal communication system is mainly used. It is based on a chain of command
from the top of the organisation to the bottom. This is used for all official messages
including directives, procedures, policies, job instructions and so on. An informal
communication system can also be used. This is usually oral and not crucial to the
functioning of the organisation.

                                         992
It originates from informal groupings, for example, associations or

welfare groups. In most cases, messages are transmitted through the ‘grapevine’ (also
known as rumours) and sometimes the communication is distorted or groundless. Such
types of communication can cause fear and anxiety among staff and the manager should
be aware of its existence and reinforce stability using more formal methods of
communication.

You will now look at some of the different types of formal

organisational communication.

Vertical Flow

The manager is responsible for passing information through vertical channels of
communication, which includes both a downward and an upward flow of
communication.

A two way exchange of information is essential in organisations and managers must
ensure that there is feedback at all levels.

Downward Communication

Most information within organisations moves from the top downward, that is, from the
top levels of management to employees. This may be through face to face
communication or written materials, for example, memos or circulars.

The purpose of this form of communication is mainly to inform employees of their
responsibilities, commitment to the objectives of the organisation and any other relevant
information. Barriers to this form of communication may include:

•    The manager may withhold information

•    The employee may fail to understand the message

•    The employee may get information but this may not be relevant to

their needs




                                         993
Figure 9: Showing Upward Communication




From the internet

This is the flow of information from the bottom up or from the subordinates to the
supervisor. Ideally information should pass freely up the chain of command so that
management gets the feedback needed to evaluate results and initiate improvements.
Barriers to upward communication may include:

•   If employees feel management is not interested in their ideas, they will not offer
them.

•    At times, bad news gets blocked and is not communicated to the top management.

•    Delays in relaying messages.

Ethics in PT

Legal and Ethical Issues In perioperative theatre technology

You will start by looking at the term ‘legal’. The dictionary defines the word legal as
'required’ or 'permitted by law'. Therefore, when we talk of legal aspects in theatre
technology, we are referring to what the law requires us to do in the theatre before, during
and after the operation. In your clinical practice as a nurse, you may have participated in
helping a patient who was to undergo an operation. Can you remember what preoperative
care was required before the patient could go for the operation?

                                          994
Preoperative Care

The preoperative care requirements are:

1. You should make sure that the surgeon explains clearly to the patient what will
happen to them.

2.   The surgeon should obtain an informed consent from the patient or parent/guardian/

next of kin for those under age or not in a position to sign (e.g. unconscious person).

3. The nurse ensures that the patient has signed an informed consent, after the surgeon
has explained the advantages and outcomes of the operation.

4. Make sure that the patient observes a ‘Nil by oral’ rule. The fasting should usually
start six hours before the operation.

5. Blood works: All should be within the acceptable ranges e.g. full Haemogram
including HB, urea, electrolytes and creatinine.

6.   The patient should be counselled and          reassured especially those receiving
operations such as amputation, ormastectomy.

7.The site to be operated on should be shaved of hair and cleaned with warm soapy water,
to reduce the bacteria on the patient’s skin. The area shaved should be larger than the
incision site.

8.Catheterisation and IV branula insertion may be necessary depending on the surgery.

9.Observations of vital signs, urine testing for sugars, proteins and acetone should be
done.

10.The receiving area nurse should confirm that the above preoperative measures have
been taken by the ward nurse in order to allow the patient in theatre. Some of the
preparations form part of the legal requirements before surgery.

In unit one of this module you covered nursing ethics where the importance of
confidentiality in nursing practice was stressed. This is another legal requirement. In the
definition of legal, the term ‘permitted by law’ implies that you can only carry out patient
care within what the law permits you to do. Therefore, the law gives the patient seeking
medical, surgical and nursing care, rights under which they are to be managed.


                                          995
The dictionary defines rights as any claim that is morally just or legally granted as
allowable or due to a person. This brings you to the term ‘legal rights of an individual
during theatre nursing’.

When it is said that a person has the legal right to informed consent, what is meant is that
they must be given information regarding the type of operation to be performed, why it
is necessary, and its effects both bad and good, before being requested to sign the consent
form for the operation.

However, you must also be aware of the fact that not all patients are given all the
information regarding the type of operation they are to undergo. Before you give such
information, you need to take factors such as age and level of education into
consideration.

No matter how impossible it is to communicate this information to a patient, it would be
against the law and their individual rights to ask them to sign the consent form for an
operation when they have not fully understood the implications.

It is on this basis that those below the legal age of adulthood (18 years in Kenya) are not
legally bound to sign the consent form. It is signed by the parents/guardians on their
behalf. In the same way, consent for the mentally ill is sought from their
parents/guardians/relatives. It is also important to note that consent for an operation
should be obtained from the patient before they are pre-medicated, as pre-medication
drugs have the potential of affecting their reasoning capacity, hence making consent
signed not legally binding.

Having looked at confidentiality and informed consent, it is important to mention that
the custody and security of the patient before, during and after operation is vested in the
theatre team. It has already been implied earlier that by signing the consent form, the
patient takes some responsibility for the whole loss of life or part of their body. However,
this does not take away the responsibility of the theatre team to ensure the security of the
patient's life during the operation.

The legal aspect in theatre nursing involves the care of the patient from the time the
patient is accepted in theatre, until they are handed over back to the ward.

For these reasons, the following procedure should be adhered to:

1.   Any patient going to theatre must be properly prepared preoperatively.

2.   The patient must sign an informed consent, obtained by the surgeon.


                                          996
3.   The patient must be protected from any harm, falls or eventuality,

during the stay in theatre.

4.   Confidentiality must be observed regarding the patient.

5. Measures must be taken to ensure that the patient taken to theatre is the right one
for the intended operation.

6. The items to be used for the operation must be counted and recorded before and
after operation to prevent loss of swabs, tubes, blades, forceps, abdominal pacts and any
instrument used.

7.   Theatre technician must know where the exits are, for use in case of an emergency.

 8. Sockets in theatre should be covered during scrubbing to prevent risk of conducting
currents. They should also be one meter or more above the floor level.

9. All electrical machines must be checked to ascertain optimum function before use
on the patient.

Ethical Issues

Ethics have always been an integral part of perioperative theatre technology .
Throughout your practice you have applied the nursing code of ethics. The ethics provide
the standards for professional behaviour in terms of what is expected of theatre
technician. They are based on the principles of what is right or wrong. The nurses’ code
of ethics serves as a self regulatory mechanism and a source of guidelines for individual
behaviour and responsibility.

As mentioned earlier, the nurse manager plays a significant role to ensure that the law
and ethics are applied appropriately in theatre technician practice. The following are
some of the roles and functions expected of them:

•    Serves as a role model by providing care that meets and exceeds accepted standard
of care.

•    Ensures that their conduct is as per the perioperative theatre technology code of
ethics.

•    Makes sure that their staff confine themselves to the scope of nursing practice
according to registration, licensure and enrolment.

                                         997
•     Delegates to subordinates wisely.

•     Provides educational and training opportunities for staff on legal issues.

•    Is aware and makes staff aware about their own values and basic beliefs about the
rights of human beings.

•     Advocates for clients, subordinates and the profession.

Written assesment

Short answer responses

1.explain the proper theartre layout

2. discuss different communication channels

3.list all the resources found in theartre

5.outline the time management in thertre

6.explain staff recruitment process

Practical task

Develop aduty roster for five perioperative theartre tecnicians

Materials

Paper

Pen

Ruler

Pencil

names

References

Louis A. Allen, Management and Organization, McGraw-Hill Kogakusha, Ltd.


                                             998
Figure                               1                         layout:
https://www.google.com/url?sa=i&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.researchgate.net
%2Ffigure%2FFirst-case-modified-OT-layout

Figure 2 operating room

https://www.google.com/url?sa=i&url=https%3A%2F%2Frajnursing.blogspot.com%2
F2018%2F09%2Fphysical-layout-operating-

figure 3 operating room lighting

https://www.google.com/url?sa=i&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.surgicalledlights.com%
2Fsale-11200111-5000k-220v-led-operation-theatre-lights-140000-lux-surgical-
operating-light.

Figure 4 duty roster

https://www.google.com/url?sa=i&url=https%3A%2F%2Fsetupmyhotel.com%2Fform
ats%2Ffo%2F181-hotel-staff-duty-roster-chart




  Learning outcome 3: Direct Operation Theatre resources

1.2.2 Introduction to the learning outcome

This unit describes the competencies required direct operation theatre resources. This
learning outcome involves, Interpersonal skills, employment Act,work place
policies,law and Labour regulations and Leadership skills

1.2.3 Performance Standard

   1. PT activities are supervised in accordance to Standard Management Procedures and
      work place policy
   2. PT staffs are motivated in work as per the labour laws and work place policy
   3. Guidelines in PT are given according to Standard Management Procedures, WHO and
      work place policy
                                           999
Definition of key terms

Interpersonal skills -are the skills we use every day when we communicate and interact
with other people, both individually and in groups.

Conflict- is serious disagreement and argument about something important. If two
people or groups are in conflict, they have had a serious disagreement or argument and
have not yet reached agreement

Content/procedures/methods/illustrations

Interpersonal skills

What are interpersonal skills, and why are they important in the workplace?
Interpersonal skills, also known as people skills, soft skills, or emotional intelligence,
are related to the way you communicate and interact with others.

When employers are hiring, interpersonal skills are one of the top criteria used to
evaluate candidates. Regardless of the type of job you have, it’s important to be able to
get along well with coworkers, managers, customers, and vendors.

Strong interpersonal skills are essential for succeeding in today’s workplace.

What Are Interpersonal Skills?

Interpersonal skills are sometimes called employability skills. The word “employability”
is a tip-off about the importance of interpersonal skills: they’re so crucial that hiring
managers really don’t want to hire candidates without them.

Many careers require consistent, if not constant, interaction with other people. This is
true even for jobs that would seem to favor introverted personalities and independent
work styles. For example, even if you’re a software engineer, writer, or statistician, you
still need to be able to communicate and collaborate with your team.

It’s important to emphasize your interpersonal skills in your cover letter and resume, and
then back up those claims with your behavior during job interviews.

Even if you excel at the technical aspects of your job, employers won’t want to hire you
if it seems like you’d be a disaster to work with.

Types of Interpersonal Skills

Communication
                                         1000
One of the most important interpersonal skills in any job is communication. Whether
you work in IT, customer service, construction, or any other industry, you will need to
be able to communicate clearly and effectively with others both verbally and in writing.
Some jobs also require skills in effective public speaking.

•    Nonverbal communication

•    Public speaking

•    Verbal communication

Conflict Management

Whether you are a manager or an employee, you will likely need to resolve conflicts at
some point in your job. This might involve solving an issue between two staff members,
between yourself and a colleague, or between a client and your company. You will need
to be able to listen fairly to both sides and use creative problem solving to arrive at a
solution.

•    Conflict resolution

•    Constructive criticism

•    Counseling

•    Mediating

•    Problem solving

Empathy

Part of being a good manager, employee, or colleague is the ability to understand and
show empathy for others. If a customer or colleague calls with a complaint, for example,
you will need to listen thoughtfully to the person’s concerns and express compassion for
their issue. Empathy is an important skill that will help you get along with everyone in
the workplace.

Caring,compassion,diplomacy,diversity,helping                                     others,
kindness,patience,respect,sensitivity and Sympathy

Leadership


                                        1001
Even if you are not a manager, it is important to have some leadership experience and
ability. Leadership requires being able to motivate and encourage others and help a team
achieve success.

Listening

Listening is a skill that goes hand in hand with good communication. While you need to
be able to express your own ideas, you also need to thoughtfully listen to the ideas of
others. This will help your clients, employers, colleagues, and employees feel respected
and valued.

•    Active listening

•    Curiosity

•    Focus

•    Inquiry

Negotiation

Negotiation is an important skill for many positions. Depending on the specific job, it
might involve creating formal agreements (or contracts) between clients or helping
colleagues solve a problem and determine a solution. To be a good negotiator, you must
be able to listen to others, use creative problem solving, and arrive at an outcome that
satisfies everyone.

•    Negotiating

•    Persuasion

•    Research

Positive Attitude

Employers want to hire employees who make the office a brighter place. They want
people with a friendly, positive demeanor. This doesn’t mean you have to be the most
social person in the office, but you must be willing to develop some sort of a positive
rapport with your colleagues.

•    Behavioural skills

•    Developing rapport
                                        1002
•    Friendliness

•    Humour

•    Networking

•    Social skills

Teamwork

Even if your job involves a lot of independent work, you still need to be able to
collaborate with others. Teamwork involves several of the skills already mentioned: you
need to be able to listen to others, communicate your own goals, motivate your team,
and resolve any conflicts that may arise.

•    Collaboration

•    Group facilitating

•    Team building

•    Teamwork

Work place policies

Workplace Policies and Procedures Checklist

Explore this page

•    What is a workplace policy?

•    Benefits of having workplace policies

•    Developing and introducing workplace policies

•    Policy checklist

•    Types of workplace policies

What is a workplace policy?




                                        1003
A policy is a statement which underpins how human resource management issues will
be dealt with in an organisation. It communicates an organisation’s values and the
organisation’s expectations of employee behaviours and performance.

Workplace policies often reinforce and clarify standard operating procedure in a
workplace. Well written policies help employers manage staff more effectively by
clearly defining acceptable and unacceptable behaviour in the workplace, and set out the
implications of not complying with those policies.

A workplace policy consists of a statement of purpose and one or more broad guidelines
on action to be taken to achieve that purpose. The statement of purpose should be written
in simple terms, free of jargon. The length of the policy may vary depending on the issue
it addresses.

A policy may allow discretion in its implementation and the basis of that discretion
should be stated as part of the policy. A policy may also be required where there is a
diversity of interests and preferences, which could result in vague and conflicting
objectives among those who are directly involved.

Not all workplace issues require a policy. Many routine matters can be dealt with through
simple workplace procedures and processes being put in place.

Benefits of having workplace policies

Well-written workplace policies:

•    are consistent with the values of the organisation

•    comply with employment and other associated legislation

•   demonstrate that the organisation is being operated in an efficient and businesslike
manner

•    ensure uniformity and consistency in decision-making and operational procedures

•    add strength to the position of staff when possible legal actions arise

•     save time when a new problem can be handled quickly and effectively through an
existing policy

•    foster stability and continuity

•    maintain the direction of the organisation even during periods of change
                                         1004
•    provide the framework for business planning

•    assist in assessing performance and establishing accountability

•    clarify functions and responsibilities.

Developing and introducing workplace policies

Step 1 – Management Support

It is crucial to have senior management support for the implementation or modification
of a policy, especially where policies relate to employee behaviour. The endorsement
and modelling of the behaviour by senior managers and supervisors will encourage staff
to take the policies seriously. While management support for a policy is an important
first step before actively seeking employee feedback on a proposed policy, the idea for
the policy and some of its details may in fact come from staff.

Step 2 - Consult with staff

Involve staff in developing and implementing workplace policies to promote stronger
awareness, understanding and ownership of the outcome. Staff involvement also helps
to determine how and when the policies might apply, and can assist in identifying
possible unintentional outcomes of the policy.

Step 3 - Define the terms of the policy

Be explicit. Define key terms used in the policy at the beginning so that employees
understand what is meant. The policy should explain what is acceptable and
unacceptable behaviour in the workplace. You may wish to include specific examples to
illustrate problem areas or unacceptable types of behaviours. For example:

An individual shall be deemed to be under the influence of alcohol if he/she exceeds a
blood alcohol level of 0.05% (0.02% for heavy vehicle drivers).

Be clear about who the policy applies to. For example, does it only apply to employees
of the company or to contractors and sub-contractors engaged to perform work on
business premises? This is particularly important, for example, with occupational health
and safety which covers everyone in the workplace.

The policy may also need to contain information about what to do if it is not possible to
follow the policy. For example, if you have a policy relating to punctuality, you may
need to include a procedure outlining what to do if the employee is going to be late.

                                          1005
The policy should also contain procedures to support the policy in its operation, such as
the implications for not complying with the policy.

Example 1: Occupational health and safety

No employee is to commence work, or return to work while under the influence of
alcohol or drugs. A breach of this policy is grounds for disciplinary action, up to and
including termination of employment.

Example 2: Email policy

Using the organisation's computer resources to seek out, access or send any material of
an offensive, obscene or defamatory nature is prohibited and may result in disciplinary
action.

Step 4 - Put the policies in writing and publicise them

To be effective, policies need to be publicised and provided to all existing and new
employees. This includes casual, part-time and full-time employees and those on
maternity leave or career breaks.

Policies should be written in plain English and easily understood by all employees.
Consider translating the policies into the appropriate languages for employees whose
first language is not English.

Ensure all staff understand what the policies mean. Explain how to comply with the
policies and the implications of not complying.

Step 5 - Training and regular referral

The policies may be explained to staff through information and/or training sessions, at
staff meetings and during induction sessions for new staff. They should also be reiterated
and discussed with staff regularly at staff meetings to ensure they remain relevant.

Copies of policies should be easily accessible. Copies may be kept in folders in a central
location or staff areas, in staff manuals and available on the organisation's intranet
system.

Step 6 – Implementation

It is important that policies are applied consistently throughout the organisation. A
breach of a policy should be dealt with promptly and according to the procedures set out

                                         1006
in the policy. The consequence of the breach should also suit the severity of the breach
– whether it be a warning, disciplinary action or dismissal.

Step 7 - Evaluate and review

Review policies regularly to ensure they are current and in line with any changes within
the organisation. Where policies are significantly changed they should be re-issued to all
staff and the changes explained to them to ensure they understand the organisation's new
directions. These changes should also be widely publicised.

Policy checklist

A workplace policy should:

•    set out the aim of the policy

•    explain why the policy was developed

•    list who the policy applies to

•    set out what is acceptable or unacceptable behaviour

•    set out the consequences of not complying with the policy

•    provide a date when the policy was developed or updated.

Types of workplace policies

Here are some examples of common workplace policies that could assist your workplace:

•    code of conduct

•    recruitment policy

•    internet and email policy

•    mobile phone policy

•    non-smoking policy

•    drug and alcohol policy

•    health and safety policy
                                         1007
•    anti-discrimination and harassment policy

•    grievance handling policy

•    discipline and termination policy

•    using social media



Law and Labour regulations

Labour Management Relations

Labour management relations has been defined as ‘the effort to develop harmonious
working relations between employees and management in order for a firm to increase
productivity, improve quality of work life and remain competitive’.

Objectives of Labour Management Relations

• To enhance a healthy relationship between employers and employees, that is, a sound,
harmonious and mutually beneficial relationship.

• To safeguard the interests of employees and management by securing mutual
understanding and goodwill between them.

• To avoid industrial and workplace conflict that could affect production and
productivity.

• To preventing or reduce labour turnover and frequent absenteeism.

• To nurture and sustain workplace democracy in order to enhance employee
participation in decision making and problem solving.

• To eliminate strikes, lockouts and go slows.

• To allow the government some control over private means of production, distribution
and service provision in the public intere

• The management should never be caught up in a surprise strike if they have been in
good relations and communication with the employees. Those in Management positions
should not be members of trade unions.

                                         1008
Other Laws Related to Nursing Practice

The following are some of the laws that are relevant to nursing practitioner

The Public Health Act (cap 242)

This Act is commonly referred to as the mother Act among the Acts of Health
Professionals.

It describes the health delivery services in the country.

Pharmacy and Poisons Act (Cap 244)

You should be familiar with this law because of drug prescription and administration.

Medical Practitioners and Dentists Act Cap (253)

In your community health nursing practice or private nurse practice you will be expected
to diagnose and treat minor ailments, this encroaches on this law.

Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (Control) Act 1994

While dealing with the dangerous drugs, you will be required to be familiar with this
law.

This also applies to dealing with drug misuse and abuse.



Mental Health Act Cap (248)

You have been exposed to mental health and psychiatric nursing.

You will interact with such patients in your practice as a general nurse, midwife and
community health nurse.



Other Laws Related to Nursing Practice

Medical Laboratory Technicians and Technologists Act (1999)

You will be taking body specimens from patients and clients.
                                          1009
You should therefore be familiar with this law.

Clinical Medicine Act

This law is related to the medical Practitioners and Dentists Act because of diagnosing
and treating minor ailments.

Food, Drugs and Chemicals Act

You will be dealing with the nutritional status of the patient. In addition, you are one of
the food handlers in the hospital. Familiarise yourself with the law.

Children and Young Persons Act

In your practice you will be interacting with babies, children, adolescents and teenagers.
This may be in wards, departments, clinics, maternity, school health and the community.
Remember children have rights which you must recognise.

You may be the provider of the health services, advocate or advisor of other health
professionals in your multidisciplinary teams. You may have heard of the African
Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child which was adapted by the 26th ordinary
session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the OAU, Addis Ababa,
Ethiopia - July 1990.

Leadership skills

Honesty and integrity

When it comes to leadership, honesty is about being transparent and open. You need to
be willing to communicate your thoughts and feelings, even if what you're saying is
unpopular or uncomfortable. It also means keeping your word as well as following
through on any promises you make.

Integrity, on the other hand, goes hand in hand with work ethic and having a good work
ethic sets an example. If you always make the effort to make the best possible decisions
both in the interest of your company and your staff, employees will look at you as a
leader with integrity.

Improve your leadership skills in our immersive course. Click here to learn more.

Problem solving


                                         1010
A lot of people believe that problem solving is fixing an error irrespective of the cost. In
actual fact, many leaders will tell you that a problem could end up being an opportunity,
and effective problem solving is about embracing that fact. It's also about avoiding
finger-pointing at all costs; if a problem emerges, it's vital that you don't get caught up
trying to blame someone. It's unproductive, wastes time and doesn't solve the issue.

Instead, it's important to look at things in an analytical way. Collecting data is always an
effective method when it comes to getting through problems. It avoids having to rely on
guesswork and will help you to ensure the problem doesn't happen again. Above all else,
it's important that a manager stays positive during a problem. Reacting negatively will
impact morale and create panic.

Delegate work to team members' strengths

Recognising your team members' strengths will help create a positive workplace
environment and ensure tasks get completed in a timely manner. If possible, carry out
either a formal or informal strengths assessment. You can assess the strengths of a team
member through observation or even through an interview. Alternatively, you can use a
more formal method such as a strength-based questionnaire.

Communicate powerfully and prolifically

Perhaps the most important aspect of being a leader is communication. You can be
incredibly innovative and technically gifted but if you lack the skills in order to
effectively communicate your ideas and methods, they will struggle to get off the ground.

You can practice your communication skills in realistic VR experiences.

Essentially, powerful communication will help you to influence as well as inspire your
team. In order to do that, there are three tools you will need to master:

•    Active listening

•    Creative questioning

•    Responding influentially

Active listening will give you a greater understanding and awareness of any given
situation, and the same can be said for creative questioning. Responding in an influential
way will help you to convey effective words and messages which will inspire your team.



                                          1011
It can take time, and linking listening, questioning and messaging requires delicate and
careful skills. Once you get it right, however, your conversations will be infinitely more
constructive and will lead to more successful meetings.

Collaborate and promote teamwork

Promoting teamwork wherever possible will help your team work more cohesively
towards the company's vision. A good way to achieve teamwork is through meetings and
assigning tasks that require your team to communicate with each other as well as form
trust and be able to support each other.

Once the task has been completed, team members will have added respect for each other
and value other members' roles. It may also work if you provide incentives or rewards
for fulfilling the tasks as this could help to motivate them even more.



Written test

Short response assessment

List all interpersonal skills

Explain the conflict resolution mechanisms

Outline factors that promote teamwork at working station

Reference

Louis A. Allen, Management and Organization, McGraw-Hill Kogakusha, Ltd.

Louis A. Allen, Management and Organization, McGraw-Hill Kogakusha, Ltd.

Jit S. Chandan, Organizational Behaviour, Vikas Publishing House.

Fred Luthans, Organizational Behaviour, McGraw-Hill.

Stephens P. Robbins,” Organizational Behaviour”, Prentice-Hall India.

Laurie J. Mullins,” Management and Organizational Behaviour”, Pitman.




                                         1012
  Learning outcome 4: Control Perioperation Theatre resources

Introduction to the learning outcome

This unit describes the competencies required to control perioperation Theatre resources.
This learning outcome involves, Resource management ,Medical legal aspects in
Perioperation Theatre ,Creative and Critical thinking,Basic monitoring and
evaluation,Observation skills,Interviewing skills and Investigative skills in Theatre.

Performance Standard

   1. Objectives for PT activities are set as per work place policy
   2. Standard performance in PT is established as per Standard Management Procedures,
      WHO and work place policy
   3. Tools for standard performance are developed as per workplace policy.
   4. Performance indicators are identified as per set objectives.
   5. Baseline performance is identified and documented as per workplace policy
   6. Targeted performance is set and documented as per Workplace policy.
   7. Evaluation of performance is carried out as per workplace policy
   8. Progress reports are prepared as per workplace policy.




Resource management

Management is the skillful handling or is the skillful handling or treatment of a task.
treatment of a task.

Resource management is the skillful handling is the skillful handling of resources.

Resource is anything that can be used to is anything that can be used to assist in the
performance of a task

Types of resource:

Human Resource ; energy, time, skill, knowledge. , energy, time, skill, knowledge.

Money, Money, used to buy other resources e.g. food equipment used to buy other
resources e.g. food equipment

Commodities, Commodities, food, equipment, fabric, wood, fuel, food, equipment,
fabric, wood, fuel, electricity, cleaning agent. electricity, cleaning agent.

                                        1013
Community resources Community resources, libraries schools, hospitals.

Legal Aspects in Theatre Nursing

You will start by looking at the term ‘legal’. The dictionary defines the word legal as
'required’ or 'permitted by law'. Therefore, when we talk of legal aspects in theatre
nursing, we are referring to what the law requires us to do in the theatre before, during
and after the operation. In your clinical practice as a nurse, you may have participated in
nursing a patient who was to undergo an operation. Can you remember what preoperative
care was required before the patient could go for the operation.

Preoperative Care

The preoperative care requirements are: You should make sure that the surgeon

explains clearly to the patient what will happen to them.

The surgeon should obtain an informed consent from the patient or parent/guardian/

next of kin for those under age or not in a position to sign (e.g. unconscious person).

The nurse ensures that the patient has signed an informed consent, after the surgeon has
explained the advantages and outcomes of the operation.

1.Make sure that the patient observes a ‘Nil by oral’ rule. The fasting should usually start
six hours before the operation.

2.Blood works: All should be within the acceptable ranges e.g. full Haemogram
including HB, urea, electrolytes and creatinine.

3.The patient should be counselled and reassured especially those receiving operations
such as amputation, ormastectomy.

4.The site to be operated on should be shaved of hair and cleaned with warm soapy water,
to reduce the bacteria on the patient’s skin. The area shaved should be larger than the
incision site.

5.Catheterisation and IV branula insertion may be necessary depending on the surgery.

6.Observations of vital signs, urine testing for sugars, proteins and acetone should be
done.


                                          1014
7.The receiving area nurse should confirm that the above preoperative measures have
been taken by the ward nurse in order to allow the patient in theatre.

Some of the preparations form part of the legal requirements before surgery.

In unit one of this module you covered nursing ethics where the importance of
confidentiality in nursing practice was stressed. This is another legal requirement. In the
definition of legal, the term ‘permitted by law’ implies that you can only carry out patient
care within what the law permits you to do. Therefore, the law gives the patient seeking
medical, surgical and nursing care, rights under which they are to be managed.

The dictionary defines rights as any claim that is morally just or legally granted as
allowable or due to a person. This brings you to the term ‘legal rights of an individual
during theatre nursing’.

When it is said that a person has the legal right to informed consent, what is meant is that
they must be given information regarding the type of operation to be performed, why it
is necessary, and its effects both bad and good, before being requested to sign the consent
form for the operation.

However, you must also be aware of the fact that not all patients are given all the
information regarding the type of operation they are to undergo. Before you give such
information, you need to take factors such as age and level of education into
consideration.

No matter how impossible it is to communicate this information to a patient, it would be
against the law and their individual rights to ask them to sign the consent form for an
operation when they have not fully understood the implications.

It is on this basis that those below the legal age of adulthood (18 years in Kenya) are not
legally bound to sign the consent form. It is signed by the parents/guardians on their
behalf. In the same way, consent for the mentally ill is sought from their
parents/guardians/relatives. It is also important to note that consent for an operation
should be obtained from the patient before they are pre-medicated, as pre-medication
drugs have the potential of affecting their reasoning capacity, hence making consent
signed not legally binding.

Having looked at confidentiality and informed consent, it is important to mention that
the custody and security of the patient before, during and after operation is vested in the
theatre team. It has already been implied earlier that by signing the consent form, the
patient takes some responsibility for the whole loss of life or part of their body. However,

                                          1015
this does not take away the responsibility of the theatre team to ensure the security of the
patient's life during the operation.

The legal aspect in theatre nursing involves the care of the patient from the time the
patient is accepted in theatre, until they are handed over back to the ward.

For these reasons, the following procedure should be adhered to:

1.   Any patient going to theatre must be properly prepared preoperatively.

2.   The patient must sign an informed consent, obtained by the surgeon.

3. The patient must be protected from any harm, falls or eventuality, during the stay
in theatre.

4.   Confidentiality must be observed regarding the patient.

5. Measures must be taken to ensure that the patient taken to theatre is the right one
for the intended operation.

6.The items to be used for the operation must be counted and recorded before and after
operation to prevent loss of swabs, tubes, blades, forceps, abdominal pacts and any
instrument used.

7.   Theatre nurses must know where the exits are, for use in case of an emergency.

8. Sockets in theatre should be covered during scrubbing to prevent risk of conducting
currents. They should also be one meter or more above the floor level.

9. All electrical machines must be checked to ascertain optimum function before use
on the patient.

Creative and Critical thinking

Critical thinking is applied by nurses in the process of solving problems of patients and
decision-making process with creativity to enhance the effect. It is an essential process
for a safe, efficient and skillful nursing intervention. Critical thinking according to
Scriven and Paul is the mental active process and subtle perception, analysis, synthesis
and evaluation of information collected or derived from observation, experience,
reflection, reasoning or the communication leading to conviction for action .

So, nurses must adopt positions that promote critical thinking and refine skills of critical
reasoning in order a meaningful assessment of both the previous and the new information
                                          1016
and decisions taken daily on hospitalization and use of limited resources, forces you to
think and act in cases where there are neither clear answers nor specific procedures and
where opposing forces transform decision making in a complex process.

Critical thinking applies to nurses as they have diverse multifaceted knowledge to handle
the various situations encountered during their shifts still face constant changes in an
environment with constant stress of changing conditions and make important decisions
using critical thinking to collect and interpret information that are necessary for making
a decision

Critical thinking, combined with creativity, refine the result as nurses can find specific
solutions to specific problems with creativity taking place where traditional interventions
are not effective. Even with creativity, nurses generate new ideas quickly, get flexible
and natural, create original solutions to problems, act independently and with
confidence, even under pressure, and demonstrate originality .

The aim of the study is to present the basic skills of critical thinking, to highlight critical
thinking as a essential skill for nursing education and a fundamental skill for decision
making in nursing practice. Moreover to indicate the positive effect and relation that
critical thinking has on professional outcomes.

Go to:

2. CRITICAL THINKING SKILLS

Nurses in their efforts to implement critical thinking should develop some methods as
well as cognitive skills required in analysis, problem solving and decision making (5).
These skills include critical analysis, introductory and concluding justification, valid
conclusion, distinguishing facts and opinions to assess the credibility of sources of
information, clarification of concepts, and recognition conditions .

Critical analysis is applied to a set of questions that relate to the event or concept for the
determination of important information and ideas and discarding the unnecessary ones.
It is, thus, a set of criteria to rationalize an idea where one must know all the questions
but to use the appropriate one in this case

The Socratic Method, where the question and the answer are sought, is a technique in
which one can investigate below the surface, recognize and examine the condition, look
for the consequences, investigate the multiple data views and distinguish between what
one knows and what he simply believes. This method should be implemented by nurses
at the end of their shifts, when reviewing patient history and progress, planning the
nursing plan or discussing the treatment of a patient with colleagues
                                           1017
The Inference and Concluding justification are two other critical thinking skills, where
the justification for inductive generalizations formed from a set of data and observations,
which when considered together, specific pieces of information constitute a special
interpretation

In contrast, the justification is deduced from the general to the specific. According to
this, nurse starts from a conceptual framework–for example, the prioritization of needs
by Maslow or a context–evident and gives descriptive interpretation of the patient’s
condition with respect to this framework. So, the nurse who uses drawing needs
categorizes information and defines the problem of the patient based on eradication,
nutrition or need protection.

In critical thinking, the nurses still distinguish claims based on facts, conclusions,
judgments and opinions. The assessment of the reliability of information is an important
stage of critical thinking, where the nurse needs to confirm the accuracy of this
information by checking other evidence and informants .

Basic monitoring and evaluation

What is a Monitoring and Evaluation Plan?

A monitoring and evaluation (M&E) plan is a document that helps to track and assess
the results of the interventions throughout the life of a program. It is a living document
that should be referred to and updated on a regular basis. While the specifics of each
program’s M&E plan will look different, they should all follow the same basic structure
and include the same key elements.

An M&E plan will include some documents that may have been created during the
program planning process, and some that will need to be created new. For example,
elements such as the logic model/logical framework, theory of change, and monitoring
indicators may have already been developed with input from key stakeholders and/or the
program donor. The M&E plan takes those documents and develops a further plan for
their implementation.



Observation skills

Observation Skills: Definition and Examples

When you're applying for jobs, it's imperative that you adequately communicate your
strengths and highlight skills that are beneficial for the role you're seeking. Developing
                                         1018
your observation skills makes you a more effective communicator and employee, which
is why many employers look for candidates that possess this ability. In this article, we
explain what observation skills are, explore how you can improve them and utilize them
in the workplace and provide ways to highlight these skills during the application
process.

What are observation skills?

Observation skills refer to the ability to use all five of your senses to recognize, analyze
and recall your surroundings. This practice is often associated with mindfulness because
it encourages you to be present and aware of the details of your daily life.

Observation skills are dependent on several other abilities and attributes, such as:

•    Communication

•    Emotional intelligence

•    Critical thinking

•    Attention to detail

•    Interviewing skills

Investigative skills Control your biases

Good investigators understand what their biases are and work to control them while in
investigation mode. Adopt the persona of a sports referee—the neutral arbitrator, without
a stake in the outcome. This is easer said than done. You work in organizations and your
leadership will have their own set of biases and perhaps even taboo topics. Yet a good
investigator must adopt and maintain that open and neutral stance.

2) Take great care in what you label a fact

How to defend your findings and recommendations? Have an impeccable foundation to
base your conclusions, rooted in a carefully constructed set of building blocks of
evidence, each of which you can demonstrate is true. Avoid single-source information
that cannot be collaborated by a second source. Remember the derivation of the word
‘‘witness” (to see, hear or know by personal presence and perception). I’m very
interested when a witness says “I saw” or ‘”heard” as opposed to “I think.”

3) Improve your interviewing skills

                                          1019
Often the most important evidence is the recollections of witnesses. Being able to gather
the information of witnesses is critically important. Only about ten percent of safety
professionals tell me they have had formal training in conducting an effective interview.
Most learned to interview by watching someone else do it – with no indication that the
person they were watching had any formal training or talent in this area. Effective,
ethical interviews require both science and art. Science gives you the basics of human
behavioral principles that must underpin the interview. The art comes only with practice.

4) Avoid moving prematurely to cause analysis

No root cause analysis tool will fill in gaps in the evidence. Keep the root cause tool and
any discussion about causes on hold until you and the investigation team agree you have
gathered, organized and assessed all available information and have a firm timeline of
the incident. Only then will the root cause methodology be effective in guiding you to
identify all appropriate causes.

5) Write more explicit recommendations

Often investigation teams lose their focus and just write something down addressing the
causes identified. Use a structured method of crafting your recommendations. Give them
precision and impact. One common structure is the SMART method—
recommendations that are Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic and Timely. Rate
recent recommendations to see how they measure up to those criteria. I think you will
be surprised.

Each of these five areas are totally within your control and do not require any particular
support from your organization. Used as a means of self- improvement you’ll develop a
reputation for the quality of your investigations.

Short answer responses

What are the attributes that enhance proper observation skills

references

Louis A. Allen, Management and Organization, McGraw-Hill Kogakusha, Ltd.

Louis A. Allen, Management and Organization, McGraw-Hill Kogakusha, Ltd.

Jit S. Chandan, Organizational Behaviour, Vikas Publishing House.

Fred Luthans, Organizational Behaviour, McGraw-Hill.

                                         1020
Stephens P. Robbins,” Organizational Behaviour”, Prentice-Hall India.

Laurie J. Mullins,” Management and Organizational Behaviour”, Pitman.




Learning outcome 5: Document PT resources

1.2.2 Introduction to the learning outcome

This unit describes the competencies required to document PT resources. It involves
Records keeping in PT and Inventories in Operation Theatre.

1.2.3 Performance Standard

PT resources to be documented are identified in accordance to work place policy

Required recording materials are gathered according to work place policy and SOPs,

Recording is carried out as per workplace policy and SOPs

Inventory is stored as per work place policy and SOPs

Waste is disposed with due regard to environment protection regulations

Inventory Control

Adequate quantities of materials should be available whenever required. Close
supervision of movement of materials or consumption rate is a good tool for proper
control.

Storage

The materials should be placed in a store within or near the institution. The store should
be of adequate size to accommodate all the different materials required, for example,
fridges, shelves and cupboards.

The materials should also be stored in appropriate conditions, for example, temperature,
light as specified by the manufacturer.



                                         1021
• It is, therefore, important that the nurse manager adopts the proper procedures for
materials management

Records keeping in PT

All professional persons need to be accountable for the performance of their duties. —
perioperative theatre technician as professionals need to record their work on
completion. — A record is a permanent written document that communicates
information relevant to a client’s health care management. It is a clinical, scientific,
administrative and legal document relating to the care given to the individual, family or
community.

Purpose of records

Provide data for planning and evaluation

Tools for communication between health workers, the family and other personnel

Indicate plans for the future

Provide baseline data to estimate long-term changes related to patient care

Provide opportunity for evaluation of services

Help in research for improvement of nursing

Types of records

Every organization keeps some records and likewise every department in the hospital
has its records such as: 1. Patient’s clinical notes 2. Nurses’ notes i.e. records of nurses
assessment and interventions and care 3. Records of admission and discharge 4. Records
of equipment loss and replacement (inventory) 5. Records of personnel performance

Inventories in Operation Theatre

The objective of inventory management is to make appropriate decisions regarding the
level of inventory. Any inventory system must specify when an order is to be placed and
how many units to order. In practice there are a lot items involved and it is therefore not
practical to model and control each item with equal attention. Classification of inventory
is thus necessary. Inventory plays a crucial role in the stock room of the operating theatre
and contributes to the loss Garden City is currently experiencing. Investigation of
Classification of inventory follows.

                                          1022
Self-assessment

SHORT ANSWER RESPONSES QUESTIONS

1.   Explain xy theory of Management

2.   State Staffing procedures/recruitment procedures

3.   Discus any three Communication methods

4.   Explain any 4 Ethical issues in operating theartre

5.   Explain any 10 examples of Interpersonal skills

6.   Describe six leadership skills

7.   State the 10 effective qualities of a team leader

8.   What Is the Importance of Studying Management Theories & Practice

RESPONSES TO SHORT ANSWER RESPONSES

What is X-Y Theory of Management?

Douglas McGregor, an American social psychologist, proposed his famous X-Y theory
in his 1960 book 'The Human Side of Enterprise'. Theory X and Theory Y are still
referred to commonly in the field of management and motivation, and whilst more recent
studies have questioned the rigidity of the model, McGregor’s X-Y Theory remains a
valid basic principle from which to develop positive management style and techniques.
McGregor's XY Theory remains central to organisational development, and to
improving organisational culture.

McGregor's X-Y theory is a salutary and simple reminder of the natural rules for
managing people, which under the pressure of day-to-day business are all too easily
forgotten. Theory X - 'Authoritarian Management' Style

Assumptions made under this theory:

The average person dislikes work and will avoid it if he/she can.

Therefore most people must be forced with the threat of punishment to work towards
organisational objectives.

                                         1023
The average person prefers to be directed; to avoid responsibility; is relatively
unambitious, and wants security above all else.

His ideas suggest that there are two fundamental approaches to managing people:

Many managers tend toward Theory X and generally get poor results.

Enlightened managers use Theory Y, which produces better performance and results,
and allows people to grow and develop.

What is Z-Theory of Management?

Theory Z is often referred to as the 'Japanese' management style, which is essentially
what it is. Interestingly, Ouchi chose to name his model 'Theory Z', which apart from
anything else tends to give the impression that it's a Mcgregor idea.

Theory Z essentially advocates a combination of all that's best about Theory Y and
modern Japanese management, which places a large amount of freedom and trust with
workers, and assumes that workers have a strong loyalty and interest in team-working
and the organisation.

Theory Z also places more reliance on the attitude and responsibilities of the workers,
whereas Mcgregor's XY Theory is mainly focused on management and motivation from
the manager's and the organisation's perspective.



State Staffing procedures/recruitment procedures

Manpower Planning

Employment of Personnel

Recruitment

Selection

Placement

Training

Training

                                        1024
Development

Promotion and Career Planning

Transfer

Performance Appraisal

Compensation

Determination of Remuneration.

4. Discus any three Communication methods

Communication Methods

A connected team and a connected organization in today’s world is the only way we can
achieve greater things. Connections and relations are built with exchange of thoughts
and information. Communication serves as a valuable mechanism in building these
connections and engagement between people.



Communication is a very important skill and art. There are four different ways we
communicate with others. No matter what form of communication we choose, it is
important to have the right intention to connect with the other person.



1. Written

It refers to printed or recorded materials such as plans, contracts, memos, minutes of the
meeting, requirement analysis document, design documents risk registers and other
related written materials. It is used to provide well-thought and well-planned details, thus
easily to be reviewed than verbal communication because everything that has been
written cannot be altered right away. More so, it can be used for future reference.



Written communication can be time consuming, but is extremely essential for formal
scenarios which require approvals and having legal implications as well. Emails have
ushered in a revolution in making written communication very fast and thus have become
a preferred mechanism for sharing detailed information in fraction of a second.
                                          1025
2. Oral/Verbal

It involves the exchange of message or information by using words verbally through face
to face or telephone conversations. It is the most common type of conversation as it
paves way to get feedback right after receiving the message. It is known to be
spontaneous as well. In verbal communication, the ability to listen and think carefully
before speaking is critical.



A person must be careful of the words or expressions to be said. Any word that has been
spoken cannot be taken back, so it is important to formulate expressions or sentences
carefully.



3. Non-Verbal

Non-verbal communication is sending information without the use of words. It is mostly
through one’s body language, gestures, eye-contacts, appearance, pitch and tone of one’s
voice etc. one can communicate huge amount of feelings and emotions.



They say, “It is important to understand what has not been said explicitly”.



Non-verbal communication includes, body-language, paralanguage (pitch and tone of
voice), appearance etc. Research has shown that nonverbal cues or body language along
with facial expressions, tone of voice and body stance account for almost 55% of all the
communication that takes place.



4. Visual Communication

“A picture is worth a thousand words”. Visual aids such as animation, colour,
illustration, graphs & charts, drawing, signs and logos immensely enhance written
communication. Visual communication is also used in the right balance for making
information sharing more effective and efficient.
                                         1026
5. Explain any 4 ethical issues in operating theatre

You are the chair of your medical center’s ethics committee and director of the hospital’s
ethics consultation service. As an otolaryngologist with a busy surgical practice, you
spend a good deal of time in the operating room and understand the special ethical
challenges that this patient care center can pose for surgeons and staff. Additionally, you
worked recently as the chief of the specialty surgical services.



Your presence is requested for a conference meeting with the hospital’s medical director,
chief of surgical services, chief hospital nurse, and head nurse of the operating room.
During this meeting, these individuals indicate that they are undertaking an effort to
review all of the procedural rules and guidelines for the operating room (OR), including
the recent statement by the American College of Surgeons on the responsibility of the
primary attending surgeon during surgery. These leaders seek your input and advice
regarding ethical considerations that could have a bearing on the revision and/or
clarification of the procedural rules and guidelines. They realize that it is important to
understand “ethics in the OR” for many of the everyday challenges and dilemmas that
arise during the course of performing surgery.



You agree to provide your knowledge and perspectives, and those of other surgeons who
participate in the ethics committee’s deliberations, for their consideration. The first set
of procedures and rules for the primary attending surgeon that they would like for you
to address includes the following:



Informing patients, during the consent process, about staff members who will be a
functional part of the surgical team, and alerting them to team members’ roles and
experience level; and

Informing patients clearly and concisely about the process of overlapping, sequenced,
and multidisciplinary surgeries under the direction of the primary attending surgeon, and
about how this practice might affect their care



6. Explain any 10 examples of Interpersonal skills


                                         1027
Active listening.

Teamwork.

Responsibility.

Dependability.

Leadership.

Motivation.

Flexibility.

Patience

     7. Describe six leadership skills

The Six Styles of Leadership

Visionary — mobilize people toward a vision. ...

Coaching — develop people for the future. ...

Affiliative — create emotional bonds and harmony. ...

Democratic — build consensus through participation. ...

Pacesetting — expect excellence and self-direction. ...

Commanding — demand immediate compliance



      8. State the 10 effective qualities of a team leader

The qualities of an effective team leader inspire the trust and respect of the team and
stimulate production within the workplace.

A Clear Communicator. ...

Strong Organization Skills. ...


                                         1028
Confident in the Team. ...

Respectful to Others. ...

Fair and Kind. ...

An Example of Integrity. ...

Influential in Core Areas. ...

Willing to Delegate

       9. What Is the Importance of Studying Management Theories & Practice

People who create management theories rely upon observation and mathematics in order
to construct a model for business activities. Management practice relies upon case
studies and the individual experiences of managers when dealing with workplace
situations. Since both schools of management have flaws and benefits, a business owner
should study both styles of management in order to improve profitability.

        Benefits of Learning

Employees most commonly leave their jobs due to poor management practices, a
situation that increases costs and lowers the talent present in a business. Business owners
should understand good management practices through personal research or formal
education in order to create a business model that can improve employee productivity,
eliminate redundancy in processes and increase retention rates.



Limitations of Theory and Practice

Management theories face limitations, because models of human behavior in a business
do not consider all of the variables that can impact profitability. Different businesses
face different issues with employees, financial resources and the use of technology.

For example, a workplace of single mothers requires a company to focus more on family
leave, a consideration that a theorist might not work into a general business model.
Management practice can also result in flawed management behavior, because managers
cannot see the business as a whole and instead rely solely upon their own experience.



                                         1029
Creating Uniformity of Management

Management theories work best from a macro perspective, such as when a business
determines the appropriate model for management as a whole or starts a large project
that it has never attempted before. The formal structure of this type of management
works best for large corporations that have a top-down management structure which
requires uniformity in order to accomplish goals, even if this model slightly decreases
productivity.



Personalized Management Style

Since management practices rely upon the opinions of managers and employees or a case
study in a particular area of business, they work best for informal organizations. Little
doubt exists as to whether a management model will work, because the track record of
the model speaks for itself. Management practices focus more on dynamics between
groups, which allows managers more flexibility in making decisions and helps
employees function together as a unit when they work together on a project.



Putting Theory Into Application

Business owners should mix management practices and theories together based upon
their business model. A small business owner will usually study and implement
management practices, because he requires flexibility to sustain his business mode. As
his business grows, he may add some elements of management theory in order to
formalize the decision making and leadership qualities of management.




References

Louis A. Allen, Management and Organization, McGraw-Hill Kogakusha, Ltd.

Jit S. Chandan, Organizational Behaviour, Vikas Publishing House.

Fred Luthans, Organizational Behaviour, McGraw-Hill.
                                        1030
Stephens P. Robbins,” Organizational Behaviour”, Prentice-Hall India.

Laurie J. Mullins,” Management and Organizational Behaviour”, Pitman.




                            CHAPTER THIRTEEN

      PARTICIPATION IN PERIOPERATIVE CLINICAL SERVICES




                             REPUBLIC OF KENYA




                               LEARNING GUIDE




                                        FOR




                                       1031
PERIOPERATIVE THEATRE TECHNOLOGY




              LEVEL 6




             TVET CDACC
         P.O. BOX 15745-00100
               NAIROBI




                1032
First published 2020
©Copyright TVET CDACC


All rights reserved. No part of this learning guide may be reproduced, distributed, or transmitted
in any form or by any means, including photocopying, recording, or other electronic or mechanical
methods without the prior written permission of the TVET CDACC, except in the case of brief
quotations embodied in critical reviews and certain other non-commercial uses permitted by
copyright law. For permission requests, write to the Council Secretary/CEO, at the address below:

Council Secretary/CEO
TVET Curriculum Development, Assessment and Certification Council
P.O. Box 15745–00100
Nairobi, Kenya
Email: info@tvetcdacc.go.ke
Website: www.tvetcdacc.go.ke




                                                                                                ii
  FOREWORD


The provision of quality education and training is fundamental to the Government’s overall
strategy for social economic development. Quality education and training will contribute to
achievement of Kenya’s development blue print and sustainable development goals. Reforms in
education are necessary to align the sector to the provisions of the Constitution of Kenya 2010.
This triggered the formulation of the Policy Framework on “Reforming Education and Training in
Kenya” (Sessional Paper No. 1 of 2019). A key provision of this policy is the radical change in the
design, development and delivery of Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET)
which is the key to unlocking the country’s potential for industrialization. This policy requires that
training in TVET be Competency Based, Curriculum development be industry led, certification be
based on demonstration of competence and that mode of delivery allows for multiple entry and
exit in TVET programs.

  The State Department for Vocational and Technical Training (VTT) has a responsibility of
  facilitating the process of inculcating knowledge, skills and attitudes necessary for catapulting
  the nation to a globally competitive country, hence the paradigm shift to embrace Competency
  Based Education and Training (CBET) to address the mismatch between skills acquired through
  training and skills needed by industry as well as increase the global competitiveness of Kenyan
  labor force. The Technical and Vocational Education and Training Act No. 29 of 2013 and the
  Sessional Paper No. 1 of 2019 on Reforming Education and Training in Kenya, emphasizes the
  need to reform curriculum development, assessment and certification to respond to the unique
  needs of the industry.

This learning guide has been developed to support the implementation of CBET curriculum in
Perioperative theatre technology and is intended to guide the trainee through the learning process.
It is my conviction that this learning guide will play a critical role towards supporting the
development of competent human resource for Biotechnology sector’s growth and sustainable
development.



  PRINCIPAL SECRETARY, VOCATIONAL AND TECHNICAL TRAINING
  MINISTRY OF EDUCATION




                                                                                                    iii
                   PREFACE
Kenya Vision 2030 is anticipated to transform the country into a newly industrializing, “middle-income
country providing a high-quality life to all its citizens by the year 2030”. The Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) number four that focuses on inclusive and equitable quality education and promotion of
lifelong learning for all, further affirm that education and training is an important driver to economic
development for any country. Kenya intends to create a globally competitive and adaptive human
resource base to meet the requirements of a rapidly industrializing economy.

TVET CDACC has a responsibility of facilitating the process of inculcating knowledge, skills and
attitudes necessary for catapulting the nation to a globally competitive country, hence the paradigm shift
to embrace Competency Based Education and Training (CBET) to address the mismatch between skills
acquired through training and skills needed by industry as well as increase the global competitiveness of
Kenyan labor force. The Technical and Vocational Education and Training Act No. 29 of 2013 and the
Sessional Paper No. 1 of 2019 on Reforming Education and Training in Kenya, emphasizes the need to
reform curriculum development, assessment and certification to respond to the unique needs of the
industry.

To effectively implement CBET curriculum in Perioperative Theatre Technology Level 6, this learning
guide has been designed and organized with clear interactive learning activities for each learning outcome
of every unit of learning. The guide further provides information sheet, self-assessment items, tools,
equipment, supplies, and materials necessary for the particular learning outcome. This is aimed at
imparting the relevant knowledge, requisite skills and the right attitude for work.

I am grateful to the trainers involved in the development of this learning guide.


Prof. CHARLES M. M. ONDIEKI, PhD, FIET (K), Con. Eng Tech.
CHAIRMAN, TVET CDACC




                                                                                                     iv
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This learning guide has been designed and developed to support the implementation of
Competency Based Education and Training (CBET) curricula in Kenya. The learning guide is
intended to support learning by providing practical and theoretical learning activities, simplified
content and self-assessment items to guide the trainee in the learning process.

I recognize with appreciation the critical role of trainers in developing this learning guide and
ensuring its alignment with National Occupational Standards (OS) and CBET curriculum. I am
convinced that this learning guide will support trainees’ acquisition of knowledge, skills and right
attitude needed for work in the Biotechnology sector.




DR. LAWRENCE GUANTAI M’ITONGA, PhD
COUNCIL SECRETARY/CEO
TVET CDACC




                                                                                                  v
ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
 TVET           : Technical and Vocational Education and Training
 CDACC     : Curriculum Development, Assessment and Certification Council
 BC     : Basic Competency
 CR     : Core Competency
 CU     : Curriculum
 HE     : Health sector
 NEMA           : National Environmental Management Authority
 OS     : Occupational Standards
 OSHA           : Occupation Safety and Health Act
 OSHS           : Occupation Safety and Health Standards
 PTT    : Perioperative Theatre Technology
 PPE            : Personal Protective Equipment
 SSAC           : Sector Skills Advisory Committee
 TBP       : Transmission-based precautions

  WHO            : World health organization
                                         ACRONYMS
  CBET                Competency Based Education and Training
  CDACC:     Curriculum Development, Assessment and Certification Council
  CEO        Chief Executive Officer
  CSSD               Central Sterile Supply Department
  ECG        Electrocardiogram
  IP         Inpatient Service (IP)
  MoH                Ministry of Health
  MRD                Medical Record Department
  MRI                Magnetic Resonance Imaging
  OPD        Outpatient department (OPD)
  OR         Operating Room
  CBET               Competency Based Education and Training
  CDACC:     Curriculum Development, Assessment and Certification Council
  CEO        Chief Executive Officer
  CSA:               Canadian Standards Association
  DLSM       :       Department Laboratory Safety Manual
  OS         Occupational Standards
                                                                            vi
  OSH:               Occupational safety and health
  PPE:        Personal protection equipment
  SDGs               Sustainable Development Goals
  SOPs:              Standard Operating Procedures
  TLV:               Threshold Limit Values
  TVET:       Technical and Vocational Education and Training
  UV:         Ultraviolet
  VTT         Vocational and Technical Training


  OS          Occupational Standards
  OT          Operation Theatre Complex
PPEs          Personal protective equipment
SDGs          Sustainable Development Goals
  TVET:       Technical and Vocational Education and Training
  VCT         Voluntary Counselling and Testing
  VDRL               Venereal Disease Research Laboratory
  WHO                World Health Organization
  IPS         Isolated Power Supply
  UPS                Un-interruptible Power Supply


  ORs Operating rooms
HR – human resource
HRM – human resource management
SOPs – standard operating procedures
EOP - equal opportunity policy
OSHA- Occupational Safety and Health Administration
ROI - Return on investment
M& E – monitoring and evaluation
WtE - Waste to energy



                                                                vii
16PF           Sixteen Personality Factor Questionnaire
CBET           Competence Based Education and Training
CPI     California Psychological Inventory
DSM            Diagnostic Statistical Manual for Mental Disorders
HCW            Health Care Worker
MBTI           Myer Briggs Type Indicator
MCMI           Millon Clinical Multiaxial Inventory
TAT     Thematic Apperception Test

TVET           : Technical and Vocational Education and Training
CDACC     : Curriculum Development, Assessment and Certification Council
BC      : Basic Competency
CR      : Core Competency
CU      : Curriculum
HE      : Health sector
NEMA           : National Environmental Management Authority
OS      : Occupational Standards
OSHA           : Occupation Safety and Health Act
OSHS           : Occupation Safety and Health Standards
PTT     : Perioperative Theatre Technology
PPE            : Personal Protective Equipment
SSAC           : Sector Skills Advisory Committee
TBP       : Transmission-based precautions


WHO       : World health organization




                                                                           viii
 TVET             : Technical and Vocational Education and Training
 CDACC       : Curriculum Development, Assessment and Certification Council
 BC        : Basic Competency
 CR        : Core Competency
 CU        : Curriculum
 HE        : Health sector
 NEMA             : National Environmental Management Authority
 OS        : Occupational Standards
 OSHA             : Occupation Safety and Health Act
 OSHS             : Occupation Safety and Health Standards
 PTT       : Perioperative Theatre Technology
 PPE              : Personal Protective Equipment
 SSAC             : Sector Skills Advisory Committee
 TBP         : Transmission-based precautions


 WHO         : World health organization


  CBET            Competency Based Education and Training
  CBPR            Community-based participatory research
  CDACC:   Curriculum Development, Assessment and Certification Council
  CDC      Disease Control and Prevention
  CEO      Chief Executive Officer
  CHAs            Community health assessments
  CRD      Crude Death Rate
  EHR      Electronic health record
  HNA             Health Needs Assessment
  JSNA            Joint Strategic Needs Assessment
  KAP      Knowledge, Attitudes and Practices
  OS       Occupational Standards
  PFACs           patient and family advisory councils
SDGs       Sustainable Development Goals
 TVET:     Technical and Vocational Education and Training
 WHO              World Health Organization

                                                                              ix
A          : Control version
BC: Basic Competency
CDACC      : Curriculum Development, Assessment and Certification Council
CM         : Common Competencies
CR         : Core Competency
ICT        : Information Communication Technology
NEMA               : National Environmental Management Authority
OS         : Occupational Standards
OSHA               : Occupation Safety and Health Act
OSHS               : Occupation Safety and Health Standards
PPE                : Personal Protective Equipment
PT         : Operation Theatre
PTT        : Operation Theatre Technology
SOP        : Standard Operating Procedures
SSAC               : Sector Skills Advisory Committee
TT         : Theatre Technology
TVET               : Technical and Vocational Education and Training
WHO                : World Health Organization




                                                                            x
TABLE OF CONTENT
FOREWORD ................................................................................................................................ 4
PREFACE ..................................................................................................................................... 5
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT ........................................................................................................... 6
ACRONYMS ................................................................................................................................. 7
TABLE OF CONTENT ............................................................................................................... 7
 1.1 Introduction to the unit of learning ....................................................................................... 9
   1.2 Summary of Learning Outcomes .......................................................................................... 9
1.2.1.Learning outcome 1:Demonstrate knowledge of the organization of the human body ....... 10
1.2.2 Learning outcome 2: Demonstrate knowleddge of the human body fluids ......................... 20
1.2.3.Learning outcome 3: Demonstrate knowledge of the human tissues & Membranes ........... 31
1.2.4. Learning outcome 4: Demonstrate knowledge of the human body cavities ....................... 34
1.2.5. Learning outcome 5: Demonstrate knowledge of the human skeletal system .................... 39
1.2.6. Learning outcome 6: Demonstrate knowledge of the major muscles ................................. 47
1.2.7. Learning outcome 7: Demonstrate knowledge of the body joints ...................................... 51
1.2.8. Learning outcome 8: Demonstrate knowledge of the circulatory system ........................... 56
1.2.9. Learning outcome 9: Demonstrate knowledge of the lymphatic system ............................ 66
1.2.10.L earning outcome 10: Demonstrate knowledge of the endocrine system ........................ 71
1.2.11. Learning outcome 11: Demonstrate knowledge of the nervous system ........................... 75
1.2.12. Learning outcome 12: Demonstrate knowledge of the digestive system.......................... 82
   1.2.13.    Learning   outcome    13:    Demonstrate     Knowledge       of   the urinary
   system…………………90
   1.2.14. Learning outcome 14: Demonstrate knowledge of the respiratory
   system………………95
   1.2.15. Learning outcome 15: Demonstrate knowledge of the special senses…………………98
   1.2.16. Learning outcome 16: Demonstrate knowledge of the reproductive system…………106




                                                                                                                                            xi
LIST OF FIGURES AND TABLES
   LIST OF TABLES
Table 1: Basic Units of Learning .................................................................................................... 8
Table 2: Common Units of Learning .............................................................................................. 9
Table 3: Core Units of Learning. .................................................................................................... 9
Table 4: Human body cavities and membranes .............................Error! Bookmark not defined.
   Table         5:           Hormones                      produced                     by                the                endocrine
   system…………………………………………73
   LIST OF FIGURES AND TABLES
   LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1: County Health Rankings & Roadmaps Model ............................................................ 445
Figure 2: Health needs ................................................................................................................ 457
Figure 3: Relation between need, supply, and demand—central area shows ideal relation. Modified
from Stevens and Raferty............................................................................................................ 458
Figure 4: One-way communication............................................................................................. 463
Figure 5: Two-way communication ............................................................................................ 464
Figure 6: Four different health concepts. .................................................................................... 475
Figure 7: Four different categories of action. ............................................................................. 479

  LIST OF TABLES
Table 1: Community-based participatory research (CBPR) methodology ................................. 442
Table 2: Community Surveys ..................................................................................................... 448
Table 3: Key Stakeholder Interviews .......................................................................................... 448
Table 4: Focus Groups ................................................................................................................ 450
Table 5: Town Hall Meetings ..................................................................................................... 451
Table 6: Advantages and disadvantages of one-way communication ........................................ 464
Table 7: Advantages and disadvantages of two-way communication. ....................................... 464


  LIST OF FIGURES AND TABLES
Figure 1: Showing Abraham Maslow's Theory                                                                                            953
Figure 2: Layout of an Operating Theatre                                                                                             965
Figure 3: Operating theatre room                                                                                                     971
Figure 4 showing the diagram of surgical lights                                                                                      976
Figure 6: Organization structure/protocol Organizational Chart for Division                                                          991
Figure 7: advantages of grouping OT as a management system                                                                           991
Figure 8: Showing communication channels                                                                                             992
Figure 9: Showing Upward Communication                                                                                               994

   LIST OF FIGURES AND TABLES


                                                                                                                                        xii
Table 1: Common Units of Learning                                Error! Bookmark not defined.
Table 2: Core Units of Learning                                  Error! Bookmark not defined.
Figure 1showing the steps of handwashing according to WHO Error! Bookmark not defined.
Figure 2: Figure showing the procedure for donning of PPEs       Error! Bookmark not defined.
Figure 3 illustrating waste segregation adopted from the Ministry of HealthError! Bookmark
not defined.
Figure 4 showing respiratory cough and hygiene                   Error! Bookmark not defined.
  Table 3 showing list of supplies and materials
  Error! Bookmark not defined.


   LIST OF TABLES
                                            LIST OF TABLES
Table 1. Common units of Learning ........................................................................................... lxiv
Table 2. Core units of learning.................................................................................................... lxiv



Table 1: Common Units of Learning .............................................Error! Bookmark not defined.
Table 2: Core Units of Learning ....................................................Error! Bookmark not defined.
Table 3: Example of an identification and maintenance log. .........Error! Bookmark not defined.
Table 4: Example of a failure event log for a preventive maintenance program.Error! Bookmark
not defined.



   LIST OF FIGURES

Figure 1: Control areas: At the source, along the path, and at the worker.Error! Bookmark not
defined.
Figure 2: Ideal Laboratory Workbench Heights Vary Depending on ProcedureError! Bookmark
not defined.




   LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1: Feedback Loop. ............................................................................................................. 17
Figure 2: Sodium and Potassium Pump ........................................................................................ 23
Figure 3: Skeletal System ............................................................................................................. 40
                                                                                                                                      xiii
Figure 4: The cranium…………………………………………………………………………42
Figure                           5:                    Types                   of
bones…………………………………………………………………………45
Figure                                   6:                             Synovial
joint………………………………………………………………………….51
Figure                  7:              Types                of         synovial
joints……………………………………………………………….53
Figure                          9:                    The                 human
heart……………………………………………………………………….58
Figure                      10:                 Parallel             distribution
organs…………………………………………………………...59
Figure                        11:                   The               lymphatic
system………………………………………………………………...60
Figure                  12:              The               white            blood
cells……………………………………………………………….,63
Figure                                                                        13:
Platelets………………………………………………………………………………64
Figure                                    14:                             Lymph
nodes…………………………………………………………………………67
Figure                                   15:                            Nervous
system………………………………………………………………………76
Figure 16:Neuron………………………………………………………………………………76
Figure 17:Components of a reflex arc………………………………………………………….77
Figure                                      18:                               The
brain……………………………………………………………………………..79
Figure                      19:                 Autonomic               Nervous
system………………………………………………………….80
Figure                        20:                    The                digestive
system…………………………………………………………………83
Figure                                      21:                               The
stomach………………………………………………………………………….86
Figure                          22:                    The                  large
intestine……………………………………………………………………87
Figure              23:             The         rectum           and         anal
canal……………………………………………………………88
Figure                         24:                    The                 urinary
system…………………………………………………………………..91
Figure                                      25:                               The
kidney……………………………………………………………………………91
Figure                                     26:                              Urine
Formation…………………………………………………………………….93
                                                                              xiv
Figure 27: Glomerular Filtration……………………………………………………………….93
Figure                               28:             Respiratory
System………………………………………………………………….96
Figure                                   29:                The
alveoli…………………………………………………………………………..96
Figure 30: The eye……………………………………………………………………………100
Figure                                   32:                The
ear……………………………………………………………………………..103
Figure                                   33:                The
testis……………………………………………………………………………107
Figure 34: Male reproductive organ………………………………………………………….108




                                                              xv
 Background Information

This learning guide will enable the trainee to acquire competencies to undertake various processes
in Biotechnology. It provides practical and theoretical learning activities, simplified content,
illustrations and self-assessment items to guide the trainee in the learning process. It also provides
links and references for further reading.

 Layout of the Trainee Guide

  Performance standards: These are obtained from the performance criteria statements in the
  related unit of competency of the Occupational Standards (OS)
  Information Sheet: This section covers information relating to the specific learning outcome.
  This information should include but not limited to meaning of terms, methods, processes/
  procedures/ guidelines, Illustrations (photographs, pictures, videos, charts, plans, digital content
  links, simulations links) and case studies. This section also provides additional information
  sources relevant to the learning outcome e.g. books, web links
  Learning activities: This section covers practical activities related to the Performance Criteria
  statements, Knowledge in relation to Performance Criteria as given under content in the
  curriculum Special instructions related to learning activities
Self-Assessment: This section must be related to the Performance Criteria, Required Knowledge
and Skills in the Occupational Standards. This section requires the trainee to evaluate their
acquisition of skills, knowledge and attitude in relation to the learning outcome. A variety of
assessment items such as written and practical tests which emphasizes on the application of
knowledge, skills and attitude is recommended
The self-assessment items should be valid, relevant and comprehensive to the level of qualification
in the learning outcome
Tools, equipment, materials and supplies: This section should provide for the requirements of
the learning outcome in terms of tools, equipment, supplies and materials. The section should be
adequate, relevant and comprehensive for the learning outcome.
References: Information sources should be quoted and presented as required in the APA format
The units of learning covered in this learning guide are as presented in the table below:

 Table 1: BASIC UNITS OF COMPETENCY
UNIT OF COMPETENCE CODE               UNIT OF COMPETENCE TITLE
HE/OS/TT/BC/01/6/A                    Demonstrate communication skills
   HE/OS/TT/BC/02/6/A                 Demonstrate numeracy skills
   HE/OS/TT/BC/03/6/A                 Demonstrate digital literacy
   HE/OS/TT/BC/04/6/A                 Demonstrate entrepreneurial skills
   HE/OS/TT/BC/05/6/A                 Demonstrate employability skills

                                                                                                   xvi
   HE/OS/TT/BC/06/6/A             Demonstrate environmental literacy

Table 2: COMMON UNITS OF COMPETENCY
 UNIT OF COMPETENCE CODE        UNIT OF COMPETENCE TITLE
   HE/OS/TT/CC/01/6/A           Demonstrate the knowledge of human anatomy and physiology
   HE/OS/TT/CC/02/6/A               Apply basic hospital procedures
   HE/OS/TT/CC/03/6/A               Demonstrate the knowledge of common diseases
   HE/OS/TT/CC/04/6/A               Provide first Aid Services
   HE/OS/TT/CC/05/6/A               Apply Medical-Legal ethics
   HE/OS/TT/CC/06/6/A               Provide Health Education and Promotion Services
   HE/OS/TT/CC/07/6/A               Provide Psychosocial Health Support


Table 3: CORE UNITS OF COMPETENCY
 UNIT OF COMPETENCE CODE          UNIT OF COMPETENCE TITLE
 HE/OS/TT/CR/01/6/A                 Provide Operation Theatre Safety Precautions
   HE/OS/TT/CR/02/6/A               Prevent Nosocomial Infections
   HE/OS/TT/CR/03/6/A               Maintain Operation Theatre Instruments and Apparatus
   HE/OS/TT/CR/04/6/A               Provide Operation Theatre Technical Services
   HE/OS/TT/CR/05/6/A               Execute Operation Theatre Administrative Services
   HE/OS/TT/CR/06/6/A               Participate in Operation Theatre Clinical Services
   HE/OS/TT/CR/07/6/A               Manage Operation Theatre Clinical Services




                                                                                       xvii
CHAPTER 1: HUMAN ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
 Unit of learning code: HE/OS/TT/CC/01/6/A
 Related Unit of Competency in Occupational Standard: Demonstrate Knowledge of Human
 Anatomy and Physiology
      1.1 Introduction to the unit of learning
 This unit specifies the competencies required to demonstrate the knowledge of human anatomy
 and physiology. It involves demonstrating the knowledge of organization of the human body,
 body fluids and their functions, body tissues and membranes and their functions, body cavities,
 human skeletal system, major muscles of the body and their functions, body joints, circulatory
 system, lymphatic system, endocrine system and its functions, nervous system and its function,
 digestive system and its function, urinary system and its function respiratory system and its
 function, special senses and their functions, reproductive system and its functions.

       2    1.2 Summary of Learning Outcomes
   1. Demonstrate knowledge of organization of the human body
   2. Demonstrate knowledge of body fluids and their functions
   3. Demonstrate knowledge of body tissues and membranes and their functions
   4. Demonstrate knowledge of body cavities
   5. Demonstrate knowledge of the human skeletal system
   6. Demonstrate knowledge of the major muscles of the body and their functions
   7. Demonstrate knowledge of the body joints
   8. Demonstrate knowledge of circulatory system
   9. Demonstrate knowledge of the lymphatic system
   10. Demonstrate knowledge of the endocrine system and its functions
   11. Demonstrate knowledge of the nervous system and its function
   12. Demonstrate knowledge of the digestive system and its function
   13. Demonstrate knowledge of the urinary system and its function
   14. Demonstrate knowledge of the respiratory system and its function
   15. Demonstrate knowledge of the special senses and their functions
   16. Demonstrate knowledge of the reproductive system and its functions

  1.2.1       Learning Outcome 1: Demonstrate knowledge of organization of the human
  body

1.2.1.1 Introduction to the learning outcome

  This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to identify anatomical
  structures, outline anatomical position, planes and directions, and identify levels of human body
  organization, describe functions of the human body, human cell structure components are
  identified, human cell cycle outlined and homeostasis described.

                                                                                               xviii
             1.2.1.2    Performance Standard
1.1 Anatomical structures are identified
1.2 Anatomical position, planes and directions are outlined
1.3 Levels of human body organization are identified
1.4 Functions of the human body are described
1.5 Human cell structure components are identified
1.6 Human cell cycle outlined
1.7 Homeostasis is described

          1.2.1.3 Information Sheet
        Definition of terms
      Anatomical position is the description of any region or part of the body in a specific stance.
      In the anatomical position, the body is upright, directly facing the observer, feet flat and
      directed forward. The upper limbs are at the body’s sides with the palms facing forward.
  Anterior (or ventral) describes the front or direction toward the front of the body. The toes are
  anterior to the foot.
  Posterior (or dorsal) Describes the back or direction toward the back of the body. The popliteus
  is posterior to the patella.
  Superior (or cranial) describes a position above or higher than another part of the body proper.
  The orbits are superior to the oris.
  Inferior (or caudal) describes a position below or lower than another part of the body proper;
  near or toward the tail (in humans, the coccyx, or lowest part of the spinal column). The pelvis
  is inferior to the abdomen.
  Lateral describes the side or direction toward the side of the body. The thumb (pollex) is lateral
  to the digits.
  Medial describes the middle or direction toward the middle of the body. The hallux is the medial
  toe.
  Proximal describes a position in a limb that is nearer to the point of attachment or the trunk of
  the body. The brachium is proximal to the ante brachium.
  Distal describes a position in a limb that is farther from the point of attachment or the trunk of
  the body. The crus is distal to the femur.
  Superficial describes a position closer to the surface of the body. The skin is superficial to the
  bones.
  Deep describes a position farther from the surface of the body. The brain is deep to the skull.

  Branches of human anatomy
  Gross Anatomy - the study of large body structures visible to the naked eye
  Regional Anatomy - the study of all structures (blood vessels, nerves, muscles) located in a
  particular region of the body
  Systemic Anatomy - the gross anatomy of the body studied system by system
  Surface Anatomy - the study of internal body structures as they relate to the overlying skin.
  Microscopic Anatomy - the study of structures too small to be seen without the aid of a
  microscope
  Cellular Anatomy - the study of cells of the body
                                                                                                 xix
Histology - the study of the microscopic structure of tissues
Developmental Anatomy - the study of changes in an individual from conception to old age

Specialized Branches of Anatomy
• Pathological anatomy - the study structural changes in cells, tissues, and organs caused by
disease
• Radiographic anatomy - the study of internal body structures by means of x-rays and imaging
techniques
• Functional morphology- the study of functional properties of body structures and efficiency of
design.

Organization of the human body




Chemical Level
• At the chemical level atoms combine to form small molecules (CO2 and H2O) and larger
macromolecules.
•Macromolecules of four classes are found in the body
• These macro molecules include carbohydrates (sugars), lipids (fats), proteins and nucleic acids
(DNA, RNA).

 Cellular Level
• The smallest units of living tissue.
• Cells and their functional subunits called cellular organelles.

Tissue Level
• Consists of groups of similar cells that have a characteristic function
     • Epithelium
     •Muscle
                                                                                               xx
         • Connective
         • Nervous

  Organ Level
  • A structure composed of at least two tissue types (with four the most common) that performs
  a specific physiological process or function.

  Organ System Level
  • Organs that cooperate with one another to perform a common function
  • For example:- Cardiovascular system.




  Functions of the human body
       Metabolism

The first law of thermodynamics holds that energy can neither be created nor destroyed—it can
only change form. Your basic function as an organism is to consume (ingest) energy and
molecules in the foods you eat, convert some of it into fuel for movement, sustain your body
functions, and build and maintain your body structures. There are two types of reactions that
accomplish this: anabolism and catabolism.

        Anabolism is the process whereby smaller, simpler molecules are combined into larger,
         more complex substances. Your body can assemble, by utilizing energy, the complex
         chemicals it needs by combining small molecules derived from the foods you eat
        Catabolism is the process by which larger more complex substances are broken down into
         smaller simpler molecules. Catabolism releases energy. The complex molecules found in
         foods are broken down so the body can use their parts to assemble the structures and
         substances needed for life.

       Responsiveness
       Responsiveness is the ability of an organism to adjust to changes in its internal and external
       environments. An example of responsiveness to external stimuli could include moving toward
       sources of food and water and away from perceived dangers. Changes in an organism’s
       internal environment, such as increased body temperature, can cause the responses of
       sweating and the dilation of blood vessels in the skin in order to decrease body temperature.




                                                                                                  xxi
     Movement
     Human movement includes not only actions at the joints of the body, but also the motion of
     individual organs and even individual cells. As you read these words, red and white blood
     cells are moving throughout your body, muscle cells are contracting and relaxing to maintain
     your posture and to focus your vision, and glands are secreting chemicals to regulate body
     functions. Your body is coordinating the action of entire muscle groups to enable you to move
     air into and out of your lungs, to push blood throughout your body, and to propel the food
     you have eaten through your digestive tract. Consciously, of course, you contract your
     skeletal muscles to move the bones of your skeleton to get from one place to another and to
     carry out all of the activities of your daily life.

     Development, growth and reproduction

Development is all of the changes the body goes through in life. Development includes the
process of differentiation, in which unspecialized cells become specialized in structure and
function to perform certain tasks in the body. Development also includes the processes of growth
and repair, both of which involve cell differentiation.

Growth is the increase in body size. Humans, like all multicellular organisms, grow by
increasing the number of existing cells, increasing the amount of non-cellular material around
cells (such as mineral deposits in bone), and, within very narrow limits, increasing the size of
existing cells.

Reproduction is the formation of a new organism from parent organisms. In humans,
reproduction is carried out by the male and female reproductive systems. Because death will
come to all complex organisms, without reproduction, the line of organisms would end.

The cell




                                                                                                   xxii
All the tissues and organs of the body originate from a microscopic structure (the fertilized
ovum), which consists of a soft jelly-like material enclosed in a membrane and containing a
vesicle or small spherical body inside which are one or more denser spots. This may be regarded
as a complete cell. All the solid tissues consist largely of cells essentially similar to it in nature
but differing in external form.

  Nucleolus, are not essential to the type cell, and in fact In the higher organisms a cell may be
  defined as “a nucleated mass of protoplasm of microscopic size.” Its two essentials, therefore,
  are: a soft jelly-like material, similar to that found in the ovum, and usually styled cytoplasm,
  and a small spherical body imbedded in it, and termed a nucleus. Some of the unicellular
  protozoa contain no nuclei but granular particles which, like true nuclei, stain with basic dyes.
  The other constituents of the ovum, viz., its limiting membrane and the denser spot contained in
  the nucleus, called the many cells exist without them.

A typical animal cell comprises the following cell organelles:
Cell Membrane – a thin semi permeable membrane layer of protein and fats surrounding the
cell. Its primary role is to protect the cell from its surrounding. Also, it controls the entry and exit
of nutrients and other microscopic entities into the cell.
Nuclear Membrane - is a double-membrane structure that surrounds the nucleus. It is also
referred to as the nuclear envelope.
Nucleus - It is an organelle that contains several other sub-organelles such as nucleolus,
nucleosomes and chromatins. It also contains DNA and other genetic materials.
Centrosome - is a small organelle found near to the nucleus which has a thick centre with
radiating tubules. The centrosomes are where microtubules are produced.
Lysosome (Cell Vesicles) - They are round organelles surrounded by a membrane and
comprising digestive enzymes which help in digestion, excretion and in the cell renewal process.
Cytoplasm - a jelly-like material which contains all the cell organelles, enclosed within the cell
membrane. The substance found within the cell nucleus, contained by the nuclear membrane is
called the nucleoplasm.
Golgi apparatus – is a flat, smooth layered, sac-like organelle which is located near the nucleus
and involved in manufacturing, storing, packing and transporting the particles throughout the
cell.
Mitochondrion - they are spherical or rod-shaped organelles with a double membrane. They are
the powerhouse of a cell as they play an important role in releasing energy.
Ribosome - they are small organelles made up of RNA-rich cytoplasmic granules, and they are
the sites of protein synthesis.
Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) - This cellular organelle is composed of a thin, winding network
of membranous sacs originating from the nucleus.
Vacuole – a membrane-bound organelle present inside a cell involved in maintaining shape and
storing water, food, wastes, etc.
                                                                                                    xxiii
  Nucleopore - they are tiny holes present in the nuclear membrane which are involved in the
  movement of nucleic acids and proteins within the cell.


Cell cycle
The cell cycle is an ordered series of events involving cell growth and cell division that produces
two new daughter cells. Cells on the path to cell division proceed through a series of precisely
timed and carefully regulated stages of growth, DNA replication, and division that produces two
identical (clone) cells.




                                                                                               xxiv
  Fig: The cell cycle
  The cell cycle has two major phases: interphase and the mitotic phase. During interphase, the
  cell grows and DNA is replicated. During the mitotic phase, the replicated DNA and cytoplasmic
  contents are separated, and the cell divides.
Interphase
During interphase, the cell undergoes normal growth processes while also preparing for cell
division. In order for a cell to move from interphase into the mitotic phase, many internal and
external conditions must be met. The three stages of interphase are called G1, S, and G2.
                                             3
                                    4       G1 Phase (First Gap)
The first stage of interphase is called the G1 phase (first gap) because, from a microscopic
aspect, little change is visible. However, during the G1 stage, the cell is quite active at the
biochemical level. The cell is accumulating the building blocks of chromosomal DNA and the
associated proteins as well as accumulating sufficient energy reserves to complete the task of
replicating each chromosome in the nucleus.

                              5       S Phase (Synthesis of DNA)
      6       Throughout interphase, nuclear DNA remains in a semi-condensed chromatin
 configuration. In the S phase, DNA replication can proceed through the mechanisms that result
    in the formation of identical pairs of DNA molecules—sister chromatids—that are firmly
  attached to the centromeric region. The centrosome is duplicated during the S phase. The two
centrosomes will give rise to the mitotic spindle, the apparatus that orchestrates the movement of
 chromosomes during mitosis. At the center of each animal cell, the centrosomes of animal cells
  are associated with a pair of rod-like objects, the centrioles, which are at right angles to each
  other. Centrioles help organize cell division. Centrioles are not present in the centrosomes of
                     other eukaryotic species, such as plants and most fungi.

                                   7      G2 Phase (Second Gap)
In the G2 phase, the cell replenishes its energy stores and synthesizes proteins necessary for
chromosome manipulation. Some cell organelles are duplicated, and the cytoskeleton is
dismantled to provide resources for the mitotic phase. There may be additional cell growth
during G2. The final preparations for the mitotic phase must be completed before the cell is able
to enter the first stage of mitosis.

The Mitotic Phase
The mitotic phase is a multistep processes during which the duplicated chromosomes are aligned,
separated, and move into two new, identical daughter cells. The first portion of the mitotic phase
is called karyokinesis, or nuclear division. The second portion of the mitotic phase, called
cytokinesis, is the physical separation of the cytoplasmic components into the two daughter cells.
                                                                                                  xxv
                                 8       Karyokinesis (Mitosis)

Karyokinesis, also known as mitosis, is divided into a series of phases—prophase, prometaphase,
metaphase, anaphase, and telophase—that result in the division of the cell nucleus (Figure 2).
Karyokinesis is also called mitosis.

During prophase, the “first phase,” the nuclear envelope starts to dissociate into small vesicles,
and the membranous organelles (such as the Golgi complex or Golgi apparatus, and endoplasmic
reticulum), fragment and disperse toward the periphery of the cell. The nucleolus disappears
(disperses). The centrosomes begin to move to opposite poles of the cell. Microtubules that will
form the mitotic spindle extend between the centrosomes, pushing them farther apart as the
microtubule fibers lengthen. The sister chromatids begin to coil more tightly with the aid of
condensin proteins and become visible under a light microscope.

During prometaphase, the “first change phase,” many processes that were begun in prophase
continue to advance. The remnants of the nuclear envelope fragment. The mitotic spindle
continues to develop as more microtubules assemble and stretch across the length of the former
nuclear area. Chromosomes become more condensed and discrete. Each sister chromatid
develops a protein structure called a kinetochore in the centromeric region. The proteins of the
kinetochore attract and bind mitotic spindle microtubules. As the spindle microtubules extend
from the centrosomes, some of these microtubules come into contact with and firmly bind to the
kinetochores. Once a mitotic fiber attaches to a chromosome, the chromosome will be oriented
until the kinetochores of sister chromatids face the opposite poles. Eventually, all the sister
chromatids will be attached via their kinetochores to microtubules from opposing poles. Spindle
microtubules that do not engage the chromosomes are called polar microtubules. These
microtubules overlap each other midway between the two poles and contribute to cell elongation.
Astral microtubules are located near the poles, aid in spindle orientation, and are required for the
regulation of mitosis.

  During metaphase, the “change phase,” all the chromosomes are aligned in a plane called the
  metaphase plate, or the equatorial plane, midway between the two poles of the cell. The sister
  chromatids are still tightly attached to each other by cohesin proteins. At this time, the
  chromosomes are maximally condensed.
  During anaphase, the “upward phase,” the cohesin proteins degrade, and the sister chromatids
  separate at the centromere. Each chromatid, now called a chromosome, is pulled rapidly toward
  the centrosome to which its microtubule is attached. The cell becomes visibly elongated (oval
  shaped) as the polar microtubules slide against each other at the metaphase plate where they
  overlap.
  During telophase, the “distance phase,” the chromosomes reach the opposite poles and begin to
  decondense (unravel), relaxing into a chromatin configuration. The mitotic spindles are
  depolymerized into tubulin monomers that will be used to assemble cytoskeletal components
                                                                                                xxvi
  for each daughter cell. Nuclear envelopes form around the chromosomes, and nucleosomes
  appear within the nuclear area.


  Homeostasis

                              9      Introduction to Homeostasis

Homeostasis refers to the body’s ability to maintain a stable internal environment (regulating
hormones, body temp., water balance, etc.). Maintaining homeostasis requires that the body
continuously monitors its internal conditions. From body temperature to blood pressure to levels
of certain nutrients, each physiological condition has a particular set point. A set point is the
physiological value around which the normal range fluctuates. A normal range is the restricted
set of values that is optimally healthful and stable. For example, the set point for normal human
body temperature is approximately 37°C (98.6°F) Physiological parameters, such as body
temperature and blood pressure, tend to fluctuate within a normal range a few degrees above and
below that point. Control centers in the brain play roles in regulating physiological parameters
and keeping them within the normal range. As the body works to maintain homeostasis, any
significant deviation from the normal range will be resisted and homeostasis restored through a
process called a feedback loop.

A feedback loop has three basic components (Figure 1.10a). A sensor, also known as a receptor,
is a component of a feedback system that monitors a physiological value. It is responsible for
detecting a change in the environment. This value is reported to the control center. The control
center is the component in a feedback system that compares the value to the normal range. If the
value deviates too much from the set point, then the control center activates an effector.
An effector is the component in a feedback system that causes a change to reverse the situation
and return the value to the normal range. Effectors are muscles and glands.


                10      Two Types of Feedback Loops: Negative and Positive

Negative feedback is a mechanism in which the effect of the response to the stimulus is to shut
off the original stimulus or reduce its intensity. Negative feedback loops are the body’s most
common mechanisms used to maintain homeostasis.

The maintenance of homeostasis by negative feedback goes on throughout the body at all times,
and an understanding of negative feedback is thus fundamental to an understanding of human
physiology.




                                                                                             xxvii
Figure 1: Feedback loop

In order to set the system in motion, a stimulus change an internal environment beyond its
normal range (that is, beyond homeostasis). This stimulus is detected by a specific receptor. For
example, in the control of blood glucose, specific endocrine cells in the pancreas detect excess
glucose (the stimulus) in the bloodstream. These pancreatic beta cells respond to the increased
level of blood glucose by releasing the hormone insulin into the bloodstream. The insulin signals
skeletal muscle fibers, fat cells (adipocytes), and liver cells to take up the excess glucose,
removing it from the bloodstream. As glucose concentration in the bloodstream drops, the
decrease in concentration—the actual negative feedback—is detected by pancreatic alpha cells,
and insulin release stops. This prevents blood sugar levels from continuing to drop below the
normal range.

  Humans have a similar temperature regulation feedback system that works by promoting either
  heat loss or heat gain. When the brain’s temperature regulation center receives data from the
  sensors indicating that the body’s temperature exceeds its normal range, it stimulates a cluster
  of brain cells referred to as the “heat-loss center.” This stimulation has three major effects:

     Blood vessels in the skin begin to dilate allowing more blood from the body core to flow to
      the surface of the skin allowing the heat to radiate into the environment.
     As blood flow to the skin increases, sweat glands are activated to increase their output. As
      the sweat evaporates from the skin surface into the surrounding air, it takes heat with it.
     The depth of respiration increases, and a person may breathe through an open mouth instead
      of through the nasal passageways. This further increases heat loss from the lungs.

In contrast, activation of the brain’s heat-gain center by exposure to cold reduces blood flow to
the skin, and blood returning from the limbs is diverted into a network of deep veins. This
arrangement traps heat closer to the body core and restricts heat loss. If heat loss is severe, the
brain triggers an increase in random signals to skeletal muscles, causing them to contract and
producing shivering. The muscle contractions of shivering release heat while using up ATP. The
brain triggers the thyroid gland in the endocrine system to release thyroid hormone, which
                                                                                               xxviii
increases metabolic activity and heat production in cells throughout the body. The brain also
signals the adrenal glands to release epinephrine (adrenaline), a hormone that causes the
breakdown of glycogen into glucose, which can be used as an energy source. The breakdown of
glycogen into glucose also results in increased metabolism and heat production.

Positive feedback intensifies a change in the body’s physiological condition rather than reversing
it. A deviation from the normal range results in more change, and the system moves farther away
from the normal range. Positive feedback in the body is normal only when there is a definite end
point. Childbirth and the body’s response to blood loss are two examples of positive feedback
loops that are normal but are activated only when needed.

  Childbirth at full term is an example of a situation in which the maintenance of the existing body
  state is not desired. Enormous changes in the mother’s body are required to expel the baby at
  the end of pregnancy. And the events of childbirth, once begun, must progress rapidly to a
  conclusion or the life of the mother and the baby are at risk. The extreme muscular work of labor
  and delivery are the result of a positive feedback system.


  The first contractions of labor (the stimulus) push the baby toward the cervix (the lowest part of
  the uterus). The cervix contains stretch-sensitive nerve cells that monitor the degree of stretching
  (the sensors). These nerve cells send messages to the brain, which in turn causes the pituitary
  gland at the base of the brain to release the hormone oxytocin into the bloodstream. Oxytocin
  causes stronger contractions of the smooth muscles in of the uterus (the effectors), pushing the
  baby further down the birth canal. This causes even greater stretching of the cervix. The cycle
  of stretching, oxytocin release, and increasingly more forceful contractions stops only when the
  baby is born. At this point, the stretching of the cervix halts, stopping the release of oxytocin.

  A second example of positive feedback centers on reversing extreme damage to the body.
  Following a penetrating wound, the most immediate threat is excessive blood loss. Less blood
  circulating means reduced blood pressure and reduced perfusion (penetration of blood) to the
  brain and other vital organs. If perfusion is severely reduced, vital organs will shut down and
  the person will die. The body responds to this potential catastrophe by releasing substances in
  the injured blood vessel wall that begin the process of blood clotting. As each step of clotting
  occurs, it stimulates the release of more clotting substances. This accelerates the processes of
  clotting and sealing off the damaged area. Clotting is contained in a local area based on the
  tightly controlled availability of clotting proteins. This is an adaptive, life-saving cascade of
  events.

  1.2.1.5 Learning activities
  1.2.1.5.1: Practical activity
           a. Choose one volunteer to complete jumping jacks at a pace that can be maintained
              for eight minutes. Make sure the volunteer is inactive for a few minutes before the
              experiment begins.
           b. Measure the heart rate by taking his or her pulse; you can do this one of two ways:
                   i. Radial Pulse
                                                                                                  xxix
                  ii. Carotid Pulse
         c. Multiply the number of beats in 15 seconds by 4 to calculate the beats per minute.
             Record the data in the table below the 0 minutes box.
         d. Measure the person’s perspiration level from 0 to 5: (0 = none; 5 = droplets dripping
             down the face). Note this observation in the table.
         e. Have the volunteer do jumping jacks for 2 minutes. After 2 minutes, measure the
             heart rate, breathing rate, and perspiration level (refer to steps 2 through 5), and
             record the data. Measure the pulse, breathing and perspiration levels as quickly as
             you can so that the volunteer can resume exercise. Do not have volunteer wait while
             you do the calculations and enter the data.
         f. Repeat step 6 three more times (remember, 2 minutes each at a time, totaling 8
             minutes) and record your data at each point.
After the final recording of the dependent variables, wait one minute with the volunteer at reset.
Then measure all of the variables again. Record this data under the “9 Time (Min.)

   1.2.1.5.2Self-Assessment
a). Define the following terms
    Anterior
    Posterior
    Lateral
    Medial
b).Which are the two main types of reactions that accomplish metabolism?
c).What is the G1 Phase of the cell cycle?
d).What is positive feedback?
e).What events precede the onset of first labor pains?
   1.2.1.5.1 Model answers
Self assessment
a). Define the following terms
Anterior - (or ventral) describes the front or direction toward the front of the body. The toes
are anterior to the foot.
Posterior - (or dorsal) Describes the back or direction toward the back of the body. The
popliteus is posterior to the patella.
Lateral - describes the side or direction toward the side of the body. The thumb (pollex) is
lateral to the digits
Medial - describes the middle or direction toward the middle of the body. The hallux is the
medial toe.

b). What are the two main types of reactions that accomplish metabolism.
  Anabolism is the process whereby smaller, simpler molecules are combined into larger,
     more complex substances. Your body can assemble, by utilizing energy, the complex
     chemicals it needs by combining small molecules derived from the foods you eat
  Catabolism is the process by which larger more complex substances are broken down into
     smaller simpler molecules. Catabolism releases energy. The complex molecules found in
                                                                                              xxx
       foods are broken down so the body can use their parts to assemble the structures and
       substances needed for life.

  c). Highlight the G1 Phase of the cell cycle.
The first stage of interphase is called the G1 phase (first gap) because, from a microscopic
aspect, little change is visible. However, during the G1 stage, the cell is quite active at the
biochemical level. The cell is accumulating the building blocks of chromosomal DNA and the
associated proteins as well as accumulating sufficient energy reserves to complete the task of
replicating each chromosome in the nucleus.

  d).Describe positive feedback

Intensifies a change in the body’s physiological condition rather than reversing it. A deviation
from the normal range results in more change, and the system moves farther away from the
normal range. Positive feedback in the body is normal only when there is a definite end point.
Childbirth and the body’s response to blood loss are two examples of positive feedback loops
that are normal but are activated only when needed.

e). What events precede the onset of first labor pains?

  The first contractions of labor (the stimulus) push the baby toward the cervix (the lowest part of
  the uterus). The cervix contains stretch-sensitive nerve cells that monitor the degree of stretching
  (the sensors). These nerve cells send messages to the brain, which in turn causes the pituitary
  gland at the base of the brain to release the hormone oxytocin into the bloodstream. Oxytocin
  causes stronger contractions of the smooth muscles in of the uterus (the effectors), pushing the
  baby further down the birth canal. This causes even greater stretching of the cervix. The cycle
  of stretching, oxytocin release, and increasingly more forceful contractions stops only when the
  baby is born. At this point, the stretching of the cervix halts, stopping the release of oxytocin.

Practical activity

  Data and Observations:
                                    Table 1: Effect of Exercise
       Total Time               Heart Rate           Breathing Rate            Perspiration Level
       (Minutes)                (Beats per            (Breaths per              (Scale of 0 to 5)
                                 Minute)                Minute)
       0 – Prior to                84                      36                            0
         Exercise
        2 Minutes                    128                       52                        0
        6 Minutes                     96                       36                        1
        8 Minutes                    120                       40                        2
        9 Minutes                    144                       44                        2

   Table 1: shows the heart rate, breathing rate and perspiration level of exercisers over nine
   minutes
                                                                                                   xxxi
                       Table 2: Effects of Exercise: Class Averages
                          Grou        Grou      Grou       Grou     Grou
  Variables Measured         p          p          p         p        p              Average
                             1           2          3         4        5                s:
   Heart        Start:      68         104        104        98       84                73
    Rate       Finish       38         152        120       120      144               115
                  :
 Breathing      Start:      20          60         60        16       36                38
    Rate       Finish       68          68         68        32       44                56
                  :
 Perspiratio    Start:       0           0          0         0        0                 0
      n        Finish        1           3          0         0        2                 1
   Level          :

 Table 2: shows the averages of the entire group’s heart rate, breathing rate and perspiration
 levels at the start and finish of exercising
                                    Graph 1: Effects of Exercise




Analysis:
There is an increase effect of exercise over time on the circulatory and respiratory systems, as
shown in both Table 1 and Table 2. As the students began their exercise in two-minute intervals,
their heart rates increased on average from 73 beats per minute to 115 beats per minute. Shawn’s
individual heart rate began at 84 beats per minute, and after lifting 5-pound weights for 8
minutes, his heart rate increased to 114 beats per minute. Also, his breathing rate showed an
increase from 36 breaths per minute to 44 breaths per minute. Based on this data shown, the
amount that you exercise does effect the circulatory and respiratory systems by causing a, on
average, dramatic increase in beats/breath per minute in the measured variables.

                                                                                             xxxii
  Conclusion:
  According to the data collected, the hypothesis that was developed at the beginning of the
  experiment: “If effects of exercise and exercise are related, then exercising will increase heart
  rate, breathing rate, and perspiration levels”; was accepted. Based on the data shown our
  individual group charts and the class averages, the effect that exercise has on the respiratory and
  circulatory systems is that it develops an increase in heart rate (Start: 73/ Finish: 115), breathing
  rate (Start: 38/ Finish: 56), and perspiration levels (Start: 0/ Finish: 1).

  Another process that could have been used to measure the external and internal effects of
  exercise on the body could be to also measure the body temperature before and after the exercise
  is preformed. This could be a good variable to measure because often the amount of perspiration
  found on a body is a result of the internal and external body temperature. The relationship
  between the perspiration level and the body temperature is that they are both negative feedback.
  After exercise, the body tries to return to homeostasis; so when the body temperature increases
  due to exercise, the body perspires to cool off and return to its regular temperature, which is
  considered negative feedback.


1.2.1.7 Tools, equipment, supplies and materials

The following resources are provided;

A functional anatomy laboratory.

Stopwatches

Stethoscope




     1.2.1.7 References
    1. Rotimi, Booktionary. "Anatomy". Archived from the original on 1 August 2017.
        Retrieved 18 June 2017.
    2. ^ "Anatomy of the Human Body". Henry Gray. 20th edition. 1918". Archived from the
        original on 16 March 2007. Retrieved 19 March2007.
    3. ^ Arráez-Aybar; et al. (2014). "Relevance of human anatomy in daily clinical
        practice". Annals of Anatomy-Anatomischer Anzeiger. 192 (6): 341–348.
    4. ^ O.D.E. 2nd edition 2015
    5. Bozman, E. F., ed. (2015). Everyman's Encyclopedia: Anatomy. J. M. Dent & Sons.
        p. 272.




                                                                                                  xxxiii
  1.2.2: Learning outcome 2: Demonstrate knowledge of human body fluids and
  their functions
  1.2.2.1: Introduction to learning outcome
  This learning outcome specifies the competencies required to identify Components of
  extracellular and intracellular fluids. Importance of body fluids is also explained.

  1.2.2.2: Performance standard
  1.2 Components of extracellular fluid are outlined
  2.2 Components of intracellular fluid are outlined
  3.2 Importance of body electrolytes is described

  1.2.2.3: Information Sheet

  Introduction

The chemical reactions of life take place in aqueous solutions. The dissolved substances in a
solution are called solutes. In the human body, solutes vary in different parts of the body, but
may include proteins—including those that transport lipids, carbohydrates, and, very
importantly, electrolytes. Often in medicine, an electrolyte is referred to as a mineral
dissociated from a salt that carries an electrical charge (an ion). For instance, sodium ions
(Na+) and chloride ions (Cl–) are often referred to as electrolytes.

In the body, water moves through semi-permeable membranes of cells and from one
compartment of the body to another by a process called osmosis. Osmosis is basically the
diffusion of water from regions of higher concentration to regions of lower concentration,
along an osmotic gradient across a semi-permeable membrane. As a result, water will move
into and out of cells and tissues, depending on the relative concentrations of the water and
solutes found there. An appropriate balance of solutes inside and outside of cells must be
maintained to ensure normal function.

Body Water Content

Human beings are mostly water, ranging from about 75 percent of body mass in infants to
about 50–60 percent in adult men and women, to as low as 45 percent in old age. The percent
of body water changes with development, because the proportions of the body given over to
each organ and to muscles, fat, bone, and other tissues change from infancy to adulthood.
Your brain and kidneys have the highest proportions of water, which composes 80–85
percent of their masses. In contrast, teeth have the lowest proportion of water, at 8–10
percent.



                                                                                            xxxiv
Fluid Compartments
Body fluids can be discussed in terms of their specific fluid compartment, a location that is
largely separate from another compartment by some form of a physical barrier. The
intracellular fluid (ICF) compartment is the system that includes all fluid enclosed in cells by
their plasma membranes. Extracellular fluid (ECF) surrounds all cells in the body.
Extracellular fluid has two primary constituents: the fluid component of the blood (called
plasma) and the interstitial fluid (IF) that surrounds all cells not in the blood.

Intracellular Fluid
The ICF lies within cells and is the principal component of the cytosol/cytoplasm. The ICF
makes up about 60 percent of the total water in the human body, and in an average-size adult
male, the ICF accounts for about 25 liters (seven gallons) of fluid. This fluid volume tends to
be very stable, because the amount of water in living cells is closely regulated. If the amount
of water inside a cell falls to a value that is too low, the cytosol becomes too concentrated
with solutes to carry on normal cellular activities; if too much water enters a cell, the cell
may burst and be destroyed.

                                  11      Extracellular Fluid
12       The ECF accounts for the other one-third of the body’s water content. Approximately 20
  percent of the ECF is found in plasma. Plasma travels through the body in blood vessels and
  transports a range of materials, including blood cells, proteins (including clotting factors and
antibodies), electrolytes, nutrients, gases, and wastes. Gases, nutrients, and waste materials travel
   between capillaries and cells through the IF. Cells are separated from the IF by a selectively
  permeable cell membrane that helps regulate the passage of materials between the IF and the
                                           interior of the cell.
 13       The body has other water-based ECF. These include the cerebrospinal fluid that bathes
    the brain and spinal cord, lymph, the synovial fluid in joints, the pleural fluid in the pleural
 cavities, the pericardial fluid in the cardiac sac, the peritoneal fluid in the peritoneal cavity, and
   the aqueous humor of the eye. Because these fluids are outside of cells, these fluids are also
                         considered components of the ECF compartment.

Composition of Body Fluids
The compositions of the two components of the ECF—plasma and IF—are more similar to each
other than either is to the ICF. Blood plasma has high concentrations of sodium, chloride,
bicarbonate, and protein. The IF has high concentrations of sodium, chloride, and bicarbonate,
but a relatively lower concentration of protein. In contrast, the ICF has elevated amounts of
potassium, phosphate, magnesium, and protein. Overall, the ICF contains high concentrations of
potassium and phosphate (HPO42−HPO42−), whereas both plasma and the ECF contain high
concentrations of sodium and chloride.

Most body fluids are neutral in charge. Thus, cations, or positively charged ions, and anions,
or negatively charged ions, are balanced in fluids. As seen in the previous graph, sodium
(Na+) ions and chloride (Cl–) ions are concentrated in the ECF of the body, whereas

                                                                                                  xxxv
potassium (K+) ions are concentrated inside cells. Although sodium and potassium can “leak”
through “pores” into and out of cells, respectively, the high levels of potassium and low
levels of sodium in the ICF are maintained by sodium-potassium pumps in the cell
membranes. These pumps use the energy supplied by ATP to pump sodium out of the cell
and potassium into the cell.




Figure 2” Sodium potassium pump

Examples of body fluids;
    Amniotic fluid - is the protective liquid contained by the amniotic sac of a gravid amniote.
      This fluid serves as a cushion for the growing fetus, but also serves to facilitate the
      exchange of nutrients, water, and biochemical products between mother and fetus.
    Aqueous humour - is the fluid produced by the eye. It provides nutrition to the eye, as
      well as maintains the eye in a pressurized state.
    Bile - is a fluid that is made and released by the liver and stored in the
      gallbladder. Bile helps with digestion. It breaks down fats into fatty acids, which can be
      taken into the body by the digestive tract.
    Blood plasma - is a yellowish liquid component of blood that holds the blood cells of
      whole blood in suspension. It is the liquid part of the blood that carries cells and proteins
      throughout the body. It makes up about 55% of the body's total blood volume.
    Breast milk - is milk produced by mammary glands, located in the breast of a human
      female. Breast milk is the primary source of nutrition for newborns, containing fat, protein,
      carbohydrates and variable minerals and vitamins.
    Cerebrospinal fluid - is a clear fluid that surrounds the brain and spinal cord. It cushions
      the brain and spinal cord from injury and also serves as a nutrient delivery and waste
      removal system for the brain.
    Cerumen - Earwax, also known by the medical term cerumen, is a brown, orange, red,
      yellowish or gray waxy substance secreted in the ear canal of humans and other mammals.
      It protects the skin of the human ear canal, assists in cleaning and lubrication, and provides
      protection against bacteria, fungi, and water.
    Chyle - Chyle is a milky bodily fluid consisting of lymph and emulsified fats, or free fatty
      acids. It is formed in the small intestine during digestion of fatty foods, and taken up by
                                                                                               xxxvi
    lymph vessels specifically known as lacteals. The lipids in the chyle are colloidally
    suspended in chylomicrons.
   Exudates - is any fluid that filters from the circulatory system into lesions or areas of
    inflammation. It can be a pus-like or clear fluid. When an injury occurs, leaving skin
    exposed, it leaks out of the blood vessels and into nearby tissues. The fluid is composed of
    serum, fibrin, and leukocytes.
   Gastric juice - is a unique combination of hydrochloric acid (HCl), lipase, and pepsin. Its
    main function is to inactivate swallowed microorganisms, thereby inhibiting infectious
    agents from reaching the intestine.
   lymph - is the fluid that flows through the lymphatic system, a system composed
    of lymph vessels (channels) and intervening lymph nodes whose function, like the venous
    system, is to return fluid from the tissues to the central circulation.
   Mucus - is a normal, slippery and stringy fluid substance produced by many lining tissues
    in the body. It is essential for body function and acts as a protective and moisturizing layer
    to keep critical organs from drying out. Mucus also acts as a trap for irritants like dust,
    smoke, or bacteria.
   Pericardial fluid - is the serous fluid secreted by the serous layer of the pericardium into
    the pericardial cavity. The pericardium consists of two layers, an outer fibrous layer and
    the inner serous layer.
   Peritoneal fluid - is a serous fluid made by the peritoneum in the abdominal cavity which
    lubricates the surface of tissue that lines the abdominal wall and pelvic cavity. It covers
    most of the organs in the abdomen. An increased volume of peritoneal fluid is called
    ascites.
   Pleural fluid - pleural effusion, sometimes referred to as “water on the lungs,” is the build-
    up of excess fluid between the layers of the pleura outside the lungs. The pleura are thin
    membranes that line the lungs and the inside of the chest cavity and act to lubricate and
    facilitate breathing.
   Pus - a thick yellowish or greenish opaque liquid produced in infected tissue, consisting of
    dead white blood cells and bacteria with tissue debris and serum.
   Saliva - is the watery and usually somewhat frothy substance produced in the mouths of
    some animals, including humans. Produced in salivary glands, saliva is 98% water, but it
    contains many important substances, including electrolytes, mucus, antibacterial
    compounds and various enzymes.
   Sebum - is an oily, waxy substance produced by your body's sebaceous glands. It coats,
    moisturizes, and protects your skin. It's also the main ingredient in what you might think
    of as your body's natural oils.
   Serous fluid - is any of various body fluids resembling serum, that are typically pale yellow
    and transparent and of a benign nature. The fluid fills the inside of body cavities.
   Semen - also known as seminal fluid, is an organic fluid created to contain spermatozoa.
    It is secreted by the gonads (sexual glands) and other sexual organs of male or
    hermaphroditic animals and can fertilize the female ovum.
   Sputum - a mixture of saliva and mucus coughed up from the respiratory tract, typically
    as a result of infection or other disease and often examined microscopically to aid medical
    diagnosis.


                                                                                            xxxvii
      Synovial fluid - also called synovia, is a viscous, non-Newtonian fluid found in the cavities
       of synovial joints. With its egg white–like consistency, the principal role of synovial fluid is
       to reduce friction between the articular cartilage of synovial joints during movement.
      Sweat - moisture exuded through the pores of the skin, typically in profuse quantities as a
       reaction to heat, physical exertion, fever, or fear.
      Tears - are a clear liquid secreted by the lacrimal glands found in the eyes of all land
       mammals. Their functions include lubricating the eyes, removing irritants, and aiding the
       immune system. Tears also occur as a part of the body's natural pain response.
      Urine - is a liquid by-product of metabolism in humans and in many other
       animals. Urine flows from the kidneys through the ureters to the urinary
       bladder. Urination results in urine being excreted from the body through the urethra.
      Vomit - matter vomited from the stomach.

   Electrolytes in the human body

   Electrolytes are elements and compounds that occur naturally in the body. They control
   important physiologic functions.

Examples of electrolytes include:
    calcium
    chloride
    magnesium
    phosphate
    potassium
       sodium
These substances are present in your blood, bodily fluids, and urine. They’re also ingested with
food, drinks, and supplements.
An electrolyte disorder occurs when the levels of electrolytes in your body are either too high or
too low. Electrolytes need to be maintained in an even balance for your body to function
properly. Otherwise, vital body systems can be affected.
Severe electrolyte imbalances can cause serious problems such as coma, seizures, and cardiac
arrest.

                           14       Symptoms of electrolyte disorders
Mild forms of electrolyte disorders may not cause any symptoms. Such disorders can go
undetected until they’re discovered during a routine blood test. Symptoms usually start to appear
once a particular disorder becomes more severe.
Not all electrolyte imbalances cause the same symptoms, but many share similar symptoms.
Common symptoms of an electrolyte disorder include:
    irregular heartbeat
                                                                                                 xxxviii
      fast heart rate
      fatigue
      lethargy
      convulsions or seizures
      nausea
      vomiting
      diarrhea or constipation
      abdominal cramping
      muscle cramping
      muscle weakness
      irritability
      confusion
      headaches
      numbness and tingling
      Call your doctor right away if you’re experiencing any of these symptoms and suspect you
       might have an electrolyte disorder. Electrolyte disturbances can become life-threatening if
       left untreated.
      Causes of electrolyte disorders
      Electrolyte disorders are most often caused by a loss of bodily fluids through prolonged
       vomiting, diarrhea, or sweating. They may also develop due to fluid loss related to burns.
      Certain medications can cause electrolyte disorders as well. In some cases, underlying
       diseases, such as acute or chronic kidney disease, are to blame.
      The exact cause may vary depending on the specific type of electrolyte disorder.


                              15     Types of electrolyte disorders
Elevated levels of an electrolyte are indicated with the prefix “hyper-.” Depleted levels of an
electrolyte are indicated with “hypo-.”
Conditions caused by electrolyte level imbalances include:
      calcium: hypercalcemia and hypocalcemia
      chloride: hyperchloremia and hypochloremia
      magnesium: hypomagnesaemia and hypomagnesemia
      phosphate: hyperphosphatemia or hypophosphatemia
      potassium: hyperkalemia and hypokalemia
      sodium: hypernatremia and hyponatremia

                                                                                                  xxxix
       Calcium
Calcium is a vital mineral that your body uses to stabilize blood pressure and control skeletal
muscle contraction. It’s also used to build strong bones and teeth.
Hypercalcemia occurs when you have too much calcium in the blood. This is usually caused by:
    kidney disease
    thyroid disorders, including hyperparathyroidism
    lung diseases, such as tuberculosis or sarcoidosis
    certain types of cancer, including lung and breast cancers
    excessive use of antacids and calcium or vitamin D supplements
    medications such as lithium, theophylline, or certain water pills
Hypocalcemia occurs due to a lack of adequate calcium in the bloodstream. Causes can include:
    kidney failure
    hypoparathyroidism
    vitamin D deficiency
    pancreatitis
    prostate cancer
    malabsorption
    certain medications, including heparin, osteoporosis drugs, and antiepileptic drugs



       Chloride
Chloride is necessary for maintaining the proper balance of bodily fluids.
Hyperchloremia occurs when there’s too much chloride in the body. It can happen as a result of:
     severe dehydration
     kidney failure
     dialysis
Hypochloremia develops when there’s too little chloride in the body. It’s often caused by sodium
or potassium problems.
Other causes can include:
        cystic fibrosis
        eating disorders, such as anorexia nervosa
        scorpion stings
        acute kidney failure




                                                                                                xl
       Magnesium
Magnesium is a critical mineral that regulates many important functions, such as:
    muscle contraction
    heart rhythm
    nerve function
Hypermagnesemia means excess amounts of magnesium. This disorder primarily affects people
with Addison’s disease and end-stage kidney disease.
Hypomagnesemia means having too little magnesium in the body. Common causes include:
    alcohol use disorder
    malnutrition
       malabsorption
       chronic diarrhea
       excessive sweating
       heart failure
       certain medications, including some diuretics and antibiotics



       Phosphate
The kidneys, bones, and intestines work to balance phosphate levels in the body. Phosphate is
necessary for a wide variety of functions and interacts closely with calcium.
Hyperphosphatemia can occur due to:
    low calcium levels
    chronic kidney disease
    severe breathing difficulties
    underactive parathyroid glands
    severe muscle injury
    tumor lysis syndrome, a complication of cancer treatment
    excessive use of phosphate-containing laxatives
Low levels of phosphate, or hypophosphatemia, can be seen in:
       acute alcohol abuse
       severe burns
       starvation
       vitamin D deficiency
       overactive parathyroid glands


                                                                                                xli
       certain medications, such as intravenous (IV) iron treatment, niacin (Niacor, Niaspan), and
        some antacids

       Potassium
Potassium is particularly important for regulating heart function. It also helps maintain healthy
nerves and muscles.
Hyperkalemia may develop due to high levels of potassium. This condition can be fatal if left
undiagnosed and untreated. It’s typically triggered by:
    severe dehydration
    kidney failure
     severe acidosis, including diabetic ketoacidosis
    certain medications, including some blood pressure medications and diuretics
    adrenal insufficiency, which is when your cortisol levels are too low
Hypokalemia occurs when potassium levels are too low. This often happens as a result of:
    eating disorders
    severe vomiting or diarrhea
    dehydration
    certain medications, including laxatives, diuretics, and corticosteroids.




       Sodium
Sodium is necessary for the body to maintain fluid balance and is critical for normal body
function. It also helps to regulate nerve function and muscle contraction.
Hypernatremia occurs when there’s too much sodium in the blood. Abnormally high levels of
sodium may be caused by:
    inadequate water consumption
    severe dehydration
    excessive loss of bodily fluids as a result of prolonged vomiting, diarrhea, sweating, or
       respiratory illness
      certain medications, including corticosteroids
Hyponatremia develops when there’s too little sodium. Common causes of low sodium levels
include:
     excessive fluid loss through the skin from sweating or burns
     vomiting or diarrhea
     poor nutrition

                                                                                                    xlii
    alcohol use disorder
    overhydration
    thyroid, hypothalamic, or adrenal disorders
    liver, heart, or kidney failure
    certain medications, including diuretics and seizure medications
    syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone (SIADH)
1.2.2.4: Practical Activity
Using a black marker pen on a white manila paper, draw a well labeled diagram to illustrate the
functioning of the sodium pump.


1.2.2.4: Self Assessment
a). High four causes of abnormally high sodium levels
b). Highlight five symptoms of electrolyte disorder.
c). Highlight five causes of hypercalcemia.
d). Highlight five causes of hypomagnesia


1.2.2.4.1: Responses
a). High four causes of abnormally high sodium levels
  inadequate water consumption
    severe dehydration
    excessive loss of bodily fluids as a result of prolonged vomiting, diarrhea, sweating, or
     respiratory illness
    certain medications, including corticosteroids


b). Highlight five symptoms of electrolyte disorder.
  irregular heartbeat
  fast heart rate
  fatigue
  lethargy
    convulsions or seizures
    nausea
    vomiting
    diarrhea or constipation
    abdominal cramping
    muscle cramping
                                                                                           xliii
c). Highlight five causes of hypercalcemia.
  kidney disease
  thyroid disorders, including hyperparathyroidism
  lung diseases, such as tuberculosis or sarcoidosis
  certain types of cancer, including lung and breast cancers
  excessive use of antacids and calcium or vitamin D supplements


d). Highlight five causes of hypomagnesia
  alcohol use disorder
    malnutrition
    malabsorption
    chronic diarrhea
    excessive sweating
    heart failure
    certain medications, including some diuretics and antibiotics
1.2.2.5: Tools, equipment, supplies and materials
Black marker pen
White Manila paper
Anatomy lab


1.2.2.5: References
  1. Ruppert, Edward E.; Fox, Richard, S.; Barnes, Robert D. (2014). Invertebrate Zoology,
      7th edition. Cengage Learning. pp. 59–60.
  2. Dorland's (2012). Illustrated Medical Dictionary. Elsevier Saunders. p. 203.
  3. Dorland's (2012). Illustrated Medical Dictionary. Elsevier Saunders. p. 1002.
  4. McGrath, J.A.; Eady, R.A.; Pope, F.M. (2014). Rook's Textbook of Dermatology (7th ed.).
      Blackwell Publishing. pp. 3.1–3.6.




                                                                                         xliv
  1.2.3: Learning Outcome 3: Demonstrate knowledge of body tissues and
  membranes and their functions

  1.2.3.1: Introduction to learning outcome
  This learning outcome specifies the knowledge and competencies required to describe type of
  tissues as well as their functions.


  1.2.3.2: Performance standard
1.8 Types and structure of tissues are described
1.9 Functions of tissues are described

  1.2.3.3: Information Sheet
  Introduction

The term tissue is used to describe a group of cells that are similar in structure and perform a
specific function. Histology is the field of study that involves the microscopic examination
of tissue appearance, organization, and function.

Tissues are organized into four broad categories based on structural and functional
similarities. These categories are epithelial, connective, muscle, and nervous. The primary


                                                                                              xlv
tissue types work together to contribute to the overall health and maintenance of the human
body. Thus, any disruption in the structure of a tissue can lead to injury or disease.

  Types of tissues
  Epithelial tissue refers to groups of cells that cover the exterior surfaces of the body, line
  internal cavities and passageways, and form certain glands.
  Connective tissue, as its name implies, binds the cells and organs of the body together.
  Muscle tissue contracts forcefully when excited, providing movement.
  Nervous tissue is also excitable, allowing for the generation and propagation of
  electrochemical signals in the form of nerve impulses that communicate between different
  regions of the body.




  Fig: tissues

Connective Tissue Membranes

A connective tissue membrane is built entirely of connective tissue. This type of membrane
may be found encapsulating an organ, such as the kidney, or lining the cavity of a freely
movable joint (e.g., shoulder). When lining a joint, this membrane is referred to as
a synovial membrane. Cells in the inner layer of the synovial membrane release synovial
                                                                                             xlvi
fluid, a natural lubricant that enables the bones of a joint to move freely against one another
with reduced friction.

Epithelial Membranes

An epithelial membrane is composed of an epithelial layer attached to a layer of connective
tissue. A mucous membrane, sometimes called a mucosa, lines a body cavity or hollow
passageway that is open to the external environment. This type of membrane can be found
lining portions of the digestive, respiratory, excretory, and reproductive tracts. Mucus,
produced by uniglandular cells and glandular tissue, coats the epithelial layer. The
underlying connective tissue, called the lamina propria (literally “own layer”), helps
support the epithelial layer.

A serous membrane lines the cavities of the body that do not open to the external
environment. Serous fluid secreted by the cells of the epithelium lubricates the membrane
and reduces abrasion and friction between organs. Serous membranes are identified
according to location. Three serous membranes are found lining the thoracic cavity; two
membranes that cover the lungs (pleura) and one membrane that covers the heart
(pericardium). A fourth serous membrane, the peritoneum, lines the peritoneal cavity,
covering the abdominal organs and forming double sheets of mesenteries that suspend many
of the digestive organs.

A cutaneous membrane is a multi-layered membrane composed of epithelial and
connective tissues. The apical surface of this membrane exposed to the external environment
and is covered with dead, keratinized cells that help protect the body from desiccation and
pathogens. The skin is an example of a cutaneous membrane.

Muscle Tissue

Muscle tissue is a soft tissue that composes muscles in animal bodies, and gives rise to
muscles' ability to contract. It is also referred to as myopropulsive tissue. This is opposed to
other components or tissues in muscle such as tendons or perimysium. It is formed
during embryonic development through a process known as myogenesis. Muscle tissue
consists of elongated cells also called as muscle fibers. This tissue is responsible for
movements in our body. Muscles contain special proteins called contractile protein which
contract and relax to cause movement.

Nervous tissue
Nervous tissue, also called neural tissue, is the main tissue component of the nervous system.
The nervous system regulates and controls bodily functions and activity and consists of two
parts: the central nervous system (CNS) comprising the brain and spinal cord, and
the peripheral nervous system (PNS) comprising the branching peripheral nerves. It is
composed of neurons, also known as nerve cells, which receive and transmit impulses,
and neuroglia, also known as glial cells or glia, which assist the propagation of the nerve
impulse as well as provide nutrients to the neurons.
                                                                                              xlvii
Nervous tissue is made up of different types of neurons, all have an axon. An axon is the
long stem-like part of the cell that sends action potentials to the next cell. Bundles of
axons make up the nerves in the PNS and tracts in the CNS.
Functions of the nervous system are sensory input, integration, control
of muscles and glands, homeostasis, and mental activity.


1.2.3.4: Practical Activity
Using the anatomy mannequin provided in the skills lab, identify the various muscles and
tissues in the human body.




1.2.3.4: Self assessment

a). Highlight four types of tissues

b). Describe the muscle tissue

c).What is a cutaneous membrane?

d). What is a serous membrane?



1.2.3.4.1: Model Answers

a). Highlight four types of tissues
  Epithelial tissue refers to groups of cells that cover the exterior surfaces of the body, line
  internal cavities and passageways, and form certain glands.
  Connective tissue, as its name implies, binds the cells and organs of the body together.
  Muscle tissue contracts forcefully when excited, providing movement.

Nervous tissue is also excitable, allowing for the generation and propagation of
electrochemical signals in the form of nerve impulses that communicate between different
regions of the body.

b). Describe the muscle tissue

Muscle tissue is a soft tissue that composes muscles in animal bodies, and gives rise to
muscles' ability to contract. It is also referred to as myopropulsive tissue. This is opposed to
                                                                                             xlviii
other components or tissues in muscle such as tendons or perimysium. It is formed
during embryonic development through a process known as myogenesis. Muscle tissue
consists of elongated cells also called as muscle fibers. This tissue is responsible for
movements in our body. Muscles contain special proteins called contractile protein which
contract and relax to cause movement.

c). what is a cutaneous membrane?

This is a multi-layered membrane composed of epithelial and connective tissues. The apical
surface of this membrane exposed to the external environment and is covered with dead,
keratinized cells that help protect the body from desiccation and pathogens. The skin is an
example of a cutaneous membrane.

d). What is a serous membrane?

A serous membrane lines the cavities of the body that do not open to the external
environment. Serous fluid secreted by the cells of the epithelium lubricates the membrane
and reduces abrasion and friction between organs.



1.2.3.5: Tools, equipment, supplies and materials

Anatomy and physiology laboratory

Well labeled charts

Magnifying lens

Anatomy mannequins

1.2.3.6: References
    1. Moore, K.; Agur, A.; Dalley, A. F. (2015). "Essesntial Clinical Anatomy". Nervous
        System (4th ed.). Inkling.
    2. Waggoner, Ben. "Vertebrates: More on Morphology". UCMP. Retrieved 13 July 2011.
    3. Romer, Alfred Sherwood (1985). The Vertebrate Body. Holt Rinehart & Winston.
    4. Liem, Karel F.; Warren Franklin Walker (2015). Functional anatomy of the vertebrates: an
        evolutionary perspective. Harcourt College Publishers. p. 277.




                                                                                            xlix
1.2.4Learning outcome 4: Demonstrate knowledge of body cavities

1.2.4.1: Introduction to learning outcome
  This learning outcome specifies the knowledge and competencies required to identify body
  cavities and describe their contents.

  1.2.4.2: Performance standard
  Body cavities are identified
  Contents of body cavities are described

  1.2.4.3: Information Sheet
  Introduction
A body cavity is any space or compartment, or potential space in the animal body. Cavities
accommodate organs and other structures; cavities as potential spaces contain fluid.
The two largest human body cavities are the ventral body cavity, and the dorsal body cavity. In
the dorsal body cavity the brain and spinal cord are located.
The membranes that surround the central nervous system organs (the brain and the spinal cord, in
the cranial and spinal cavities are the three meninges. The differently lined spaces contain
different types of fluid. In the meninges for example the fluid is cerebrospinal fluid; in
the abdominal cavity the fluid contained in the peritoneum is a serous fluid.
                                                                                                  l
In amniotes and some invertebrates the peritoneum lines their largest body cavity called
the coelom.

                                     16     Human body cavities




            Fig: Human body cavities

 17      The dorsal (posterior) cavity and the ventral (anterior) cavity are the largest body
                                        compartments.
The dorsal body cavity includes the cranial cavity, enclosed by the skull and contains the brain,
and the spinal cavity, enclosed by the spine and contains the spinal cord.The ventral body
cavity includes the thoracic cavity, enclosed by the ribcage and contains the lungs and heart; and
the abdominopelvic cavity. The abdominopelvic cavity can be divided into the abdominal cavity,
enclosed by the ribcage and pelvis and contains
the kidneys, ureters, stomach, intestines, liver, gallbladder, and pancreas; and the pelvic cavity,
enclosed by the pelvis and contains bladder, anus and reproductive system.
  Table 4
                                    Human body cavities and membranes

                                                                                     Membranous
                    Name of cavity                          Principal contents
                                                                                       lining

      Dorsal      Cranial cavity                        Brain                       Meninges
       body
      cavity      Vertebral canal                       Spinal cord                 Meninges

                                                                                    Pericardium
                  Thoracic cavity                       Heart, Lungs
                                                                                    Pleural cavity




                                                                                                     li
                                         Abdominal        Digestive
      Ventral                                                                              Peritoneum
                   Abdominopelvic        cavity           organs, spleen, kidneys
       body
                   cavity                                 Bladder,      reproductive
      cavity                             Pelvic cavity                                     Peritoneum
                                                          organs


    Table 4: Human body cavities and membranes
      Ventral body cavity
The thoracic cavity consists of three cavities that fill the interior area of the chest.
    The two pleural cavities are situated on both sides of the body, anterior to the spine and lateral
     to the breastbone.
    The superior mediastinum is a wedge-shaped cavity located between the superior regions of
     the two thoracic cavities.
    The pericardial cavity within the mediastinum is located at the center of the chest below the
     superior mediastinum. The pericardial cavity roughly outlines the shape of the heart.

The diaphragm divides the thoracic and the abdominal cavities. The abdominal cavity occupies
the entire lower half of the trunk, anterior to the spine. Just under the abdominal cavity, anterior
to the buttocks, is the pelvic cavity. The pelvic cavity is funnel shaped and is located inferior and
anterior to the abdominal cavity.
Together the abdominal and pelvic cavity can be referred to as the abdominopelvic cavity while
the thoracic, abdominal, and pelvic cavities together can be referred to as the ventral body cavity.
Subdivisions of the Posterior (Dorsal) and Anterior (Ventral) Cavities The anterior (ventral)
cavity has two main subdivisions: the thoracic cavity and the abdominopelvic cavity. The
thoracic cavity is the more superior subdivision of the anterior cavity, and it is enclosed by the
rib cage.
The thoracic cavity contains the lungs and the heart, which is located in the mediastinum. The
diaphragm forms the floor of the thoracic cavity and separates it from the more inferior
abdominopelvic cavity. The abdominopelvic cavity is the largest cavity in the body. Although no
membrane physically divides the abdominopelvic cavity, it can be useful to distinguish between
the abdominal cavity, the division that houses the digestive organs, and the pelvic cavity, the
division that houses the organs of reproduction.


      Dorsal body cavity
    The cranial cavity is a large, bean-shaped cavity filling most of the upper skull where the brain
    is located. The spinal cavity is a very narrow, thread-like cavity running from the cranial cavity
    down the entire length of the spinal cord.
Together the cranial cavity and spinal (or vertebral) cavity can be referred to as the dorsal body
cavity. In the posterior (dorsal) cavity, the cranial cavity houses the brain, and the spinal cavity
encloses the spinal cord. Just as the brain and spinal cord make up a continuous, uninterrupted

                                                                                                        lii
structure, the cranial and spinal cavities that house them are also continuous. The brain and
spinal cord are protected by the bones of the skull and vertebral column and by cerebrospinal
fluid, a colorless fluid produced by the brain, which cushions the brain and spinal cord within the
posterior (dorsal) cavity.


                                       18      Development
At the end of the third week, the neural tube, which is a fold of one of the layers of the trilaminar
germ disc, called the ectoderm, appears. This layer elevates and closes dorsally, while the gut
tube rolls up and closes ventrally to create a “tube on top of a tube.” The mesoderm, which is
another layer of the trilaminar germ disc, holds the tubes together and the lateral plate mesoderm,
the middle layer of the germ disc, splits to form a visceral layer associated with the gut and a
parietal layer, which along with the overlying ectoderm, forms the lateral body wall. The space
between the visceral and parietal layers of lateral plate mesoderm is the primitive body cavity.
When the lateral body wall folds, it moves ventrally and fuses at the midline. The body cavity
closes, except in the region of the connecting stalk. Here, the gut tube maintains an attachment to
the yolk sac. The yolk sac is a membranous sac attached to the embryo, which provides nutrients
and functions as the circulatory system of the very early embryo.
The lateral body wall folds, pulling the amnion in with it so that the amnion surrounds the
embryo and extends over the connecting stalk, which becomes the umbilical cord, which
connects the fetus with the placenta. If the ventral body wall fails to close, ventral body wall
defects can result, such as ectopia cordis, a congenital malformation in which the heart is
abnormally located outside the thorax. Another defect is gastroschisis, a congenital defect in the
anterior abdominal wall through which the abdominal contents freely protrude. Another
possibility is bladder exstrophy, in which part of the urinary bladder is present outside the body.
In normal circumstances, the parietal mesoderm will form the parietal layer of serous membranes
lining the outside (walls) of the peritoneal, pleural, and pericardial cavities. The visceral layer
will form the visceral layer of the serous membranes covering the lungs, heart, and abdominal
organs. These layers are continuous at the root of each organ as the organs lie in their respective
cavities. The peritoneum, a serum membrane that forms the lining of the abdominal cavity, forms
in the gut layers and in places mesenteries extend from the gut as double layers of peritoneum.
Mesenteries provide a pathway for vessels, nerves, and lymphatics to the organs. Initially, the gut
tube from the caudal end of the foregut to the end of the hindgut is suspended from the dorsal
body wall by dorsal mesentery. Ventral mesentery, derived from the septum transversum, exists
only in the region of the terminal part of the esophagus, the stomach, and the upper portion of the
duodenum.


                                        19      Function
These cavities contain and protect delicate internal organs, and the ventral cavity allows for
significant changes in the size and shape of the organs as they perform their functions.



                                                                                                  liii
Anatomical structures are often described in terms of the cavity in which they reside. The body
maintains its internal organization by means of membranes, sheaths, and other structures that
separate compartments.
The lungs, heart, stomach, and intestines, for example, can expand and contract without
distorting other tissues or disrupting the activity of nearby organs. The ventral cavity includes
the thoracic and abdominopelvic cavities and their subdivisions. The dorsal cavity includes
the cranial and spinal cavities.


1.2.4.4: Practical activity
Using the mannequin provided, identify the various cavities in the human body.


  1.2.4.5.: Self Assessment
  a). Highlight three components of the thoracic cavity.
  b). Describe the dorsal cavity.
  c). Highlight the functions of the body cavities.
  d). what is the function of the peritoneum?

 1.2.4.5.1: Model Answers
 a). Highlight three components of the thoracic cavity.
 The two pleural cavities are situated on both sides of the body, anterior to the spine and lateral
   to the breastbone.
 The superior mediastinum is a wedge-shaped cavity located between the superior regions of
   the two thoracic cavities.
 The pericardial cavity within the mediastinum is located at the center of the chest below the
   superior mediastinum. The pericardial cavity roughly outlines the shape of the heart.

  b). Describe the dorsal cavity.

  The cranial cavity is a large, bean-shaped cavity filling most of the upper skull where the brain
  is located. The spinal cavity is a very narrow, thread-like cavity running from the cranial cavity
  down the entire length of the spinal cord.
  Together the cranial cavity and spinal (or vertebral) cavity can be referred to as the dorsal body
  cavity. In the posterior (dorsal) cavity, the cranial cavity houses the brain, and the spinal cavity
  encloses the spinal cord. Just as the brain and spinal cord make up a continuous, uninterrupted
  structure, the cranial and spinal cavities that house them are also continuous. The brain and
  spinal cord are protected by the bones of the skull and vertebral column and by cerebrospinal
  fluid, a colorless fluid produced by the brain, which cushions the brain and spinal cord within
  the posterior (dorsal) cavity.

  c). Highlight the functions of the body cavities.

                                                                                                    liv
These cavities contain and protect delicate internal organs, and the ventral cavity allows for
significant changes in the size and shape of the organs as they perform their functions.
Anatomical structures are often described in terms of the cavity in which they reside. The body
maintains its internal organization by means of membranes, sheaths, and other structures that
separate compartments.
The lungs, heart, stomach, and intestines, for example, can expand and contract without
distorting other tissues or disrupting the activity of nearby organs. The ventral cavity includes
the thoracic and abdominopelvic cavities and their subdivisions. The dorsal cavity includes
the cranial and spinal cavities.
  d). what is the function of the peritoneum?
  The peritoneum, a serum membrane that forms the lining of the abdominal cavity, forms in the
  gut layers and in places mesenteries extend from the gut as double layers of peritoneum.

  1.2.4.5: Tools, equipment, supplies and materials
  Anatomy and physiology lab
  Anatomical models and mannequins
  Magnifying lens


  1.2.4.6: References
    1. Fell, C.; Griffith Pearson, F. (November 2017). "Thoracic Surgery Clinics: Historical
        Perspectives of Thoracic Anatomy". Thorac Surg Clin. 17 (4):
    2. Newman, Tim (2014) . "Introduction to Physiology: History And Scope". Medicine News
        Today.
    3. Zimmer, Carl (2014). "Soul Made Flesh: The Discovery of the Brain – and How It Changed
        the World".
    4. Feder, Martin E. (2017). New directions in ecological physiology. New York: Cambridge
        University Press.
    5. Garland, Jr, Theodore; Carter, P. A. (2014). "Evolutionary physiology" (PDF). Annual
        Review of Physiology. 56 (1): 579–621.




                                                                                                    lv
1.2.5: Learning Outcome 5: Demonstrate knowledge of the human skeletal
system

1.2.5.1: Introduction to the learning outcome.
This learning outcome specifies the competencies required to identify divisions of the human
skeleton, outline components of the axial skeleton as well as describe components of the
appendicular skeleton. Types of bones are also described.

1.2.5.2:Performance Standard
Divisions of the human skeleton outlined
Components of the axial skeleton are described
Components of the appendicular skeleton are described
Types of bones are described

1.2.5.3: Information Sheet
                                                                                         lvi
Introduction
Human skeleton, the internal skeleton that serves as a framework for the body. This framework
consists of many individual bones and cartilages. There also are bands of fibrous connective
tissue the ligaments and the tendons in intimate relationship with the parts of the skeleton. This
article is concerned primarily with the gross structure and the function of the skeleton of the
normal human adult.

Functions of the skeletal System
The primary organs of the human skeletal system – bones -lie buried within the muscles and
other soft tissues. Bones are living organs and have the ability to grow.

The six main functions of the skeletal system
Support – Bones form the body's supporting framework. All of the softer tissues of the body
hang from the skeletal system.
Protection – Hard, bony “boxes” protect delicate structures enclosed within them. For example,
our skull protects our brain. Our breastbone and ribs protect our heart and lungs. Our pelvis
protects our intestines and bladder and, in females, our uterus and during pregnancy the
developing foetus.
Movement - Muscles are anchored firmly to bones. As muscles contract and shorten, they pull
on bones and thereby move them.
Mineral storage – Bones act as reserves of minerals important for our body, most notably
calcium and phosphorus. Bones maintain homeostasis of blood calcium.
Growth factor storage - Bones store important growth factors, for example fibroblast growth
factor, which acts on the kidney to reduce phosphate reabsorption. In this function, our bones
are an endocrine organ.
Hemopoiesis – This is the process of blood formation. Blood cells are formed in red bone
marrow.




                                                                                               lvii
Figure 3: Skeletal system
The human skeleton, like that of other vertebrates, consists of two principal subdivisions, each
with origins distinct from the others and each presenting certain individual features.

These are

 (1) the axial, comprising the vertebral column the spine and much of the skull, and
(2)the appendicular, to which the pelvic (hip) and pectoral (shoulder) girdles and the bones and
cartilages of the limbs belong. Discussed in this article as part of the axial skeleton is a third
subdivision, the visceral, comprising the lower jaw, some elements of the upper jaw, and the
branchial arches, including the hyoid bone.

When one considers the relation of these subdivisions of the skeleton to the soft parts of the
human body such as the nervous system, the digestive system, the respiratory system,
the cardiovascular system, and the voluntary muscles of the muscle system it is clear that the
functions of the skeleton are of three different types: support, protection, and motion. Of these
functions, support is the most primitive and the oldest; likewise, the axial part of the skeleton
was the first to evolve. The vertebral column, corresponding to the notochord in lower
organisms, is the main support of the trunk.

The central nervous system lies largely within the axial skeleton, the brain being well protected
by the cranium and the spinal cord by the vertebral column, by means of the bony neural arches
(the arches of bone that encircle the spinal cord) and the intervening ligaments.

Protection of the heart, lungs, and other organs and structures in the chest creates a problem
somewhat different from that of the central nervous system. These organs, the function of which
involves motion, expansion, and contraction, must have a flexible and elastic protective
                                                                                              lviii
  covering. Such a covering is provided by the bony thoracic basket, or rib cage, which forms the
  skeleton of the wall of the chest, or thorax. The connection of the ribs to the breastbone
  the sternum is in all cases a secondary one, brought about by the relatively pliable rib (costal)
  cartilages. The small joints between the ribs and the vertebrae permit a gliding motion of the
  ribs on the vertebrae during breathing and other activities. The motion is limited by the
  ligamentous attachments between ribs and vertebrae.

  The third general function of the skeleton is that of motion. The great majority of the skeletal
  muscles are firmly anchored to the skeleton, usually to at least two bones and in some cases to
  many bones. Thus, the motions of the body and its parts, all the way from the lunge of the
  football player to the delicate manipulations of a handicraft artist or of the use of complicated
  instruments by a scientist, are made possible by separate and individual engineering
  arrangements between muscle and bone.

  In this article the parts of the skeleton are described in terms of their sharing in these functions.
  The disorders and injuries that can affect the human skeleton are described in the article bone
  disease.

Axial And Visceral Skeleton

                                       20      The cranium

   21     The cranium is the part of the skull that encloses the brain is sometimes called the
 braincase, but its intimate relation to the sense organs for sight, sound, smell, and taste and to
                other structures makes such a designation somewhat misleading.




                                                                                                      lix
Figure 4: The cranium
                             22      Development of cranial bones
The cranium is formed of bones of two different types of developmental origin—
the cartilaginous, or substitution, bones, which replace cartilages preformed in the general shape
of the bone; and membrane bones, which are laid down within layers of connective tissue. For
the most part, the substitution bones form the floor of the cranium, while membrane bones form
the sides and roof.
The range in the capacity of the cranial cavity is wide but is not directly proportional to the size
of the skull, because there are variations also in the thickness of the bones and in the size of the
air pockets, or sinuses. The cranial cavity has a rough, uneven floor, but its landmarks and details
of structure generally are consistent from one skull to another.

The cranium forms all the upper portion of the skull, with the bones of the face situated beneath
its forward part. It consists of a relatively few large bones, the frontal bone, the sphenoid bone,
two temporal bones, two parietal bones, and the occipital bone. The frontal bone underlies the
forehead region and extends back to the coronal suture, an arching line that separates the frontal
bone from the two parietal bones, on the sides of the cranium. In front, the frontal bone forms
a joint with the two small bones of the bridge of the nose and with the zygomatic bone (which
forms part of the cheekbone; The facial bones and their complex functions), the sphenoid, and
the maxillary bones. Between the nasal and zygomatic bones, the horizontal portion of the
frontal bone extends back to form a part of the roof of the eye socket, or orbit; it thus serves an
important protective function for the eye and its accessory structures.

Each parietal bone has a generally four-sided outline. Together they form a large portion of the
side walls of the cranium. Each adjoins the frontal, the sphenoid, the temporal, and the occipital
bones and its fellow of the opposite side. They are almost exclusively cranial bones, having less
relation to other structures than the other bones that help to form the cranium.



                                                                                                  lx
Interior of the cranium
The interior of the cranium shows a multitude of details, reflecting the shapes of the softer
structures that are in contact with the bones.

  The internal surface of the vault is relatively uncomplicated. In the midline front to back, along
  the sagittal suture, the seam between the two parietal bones, is a shallow depression—the groove
  for the superior longitudinal venous sinus, a large channel for venous blood. A number of
  depressions on either side of it mark the sites of the pacchionian bodies, structures that permit
  the venous system to absorb cerebrospinal fluid. The large thin-walled venous sinuses all lie
  within the cranial cavity. While they are thus protected by the cranium, in many places they are
  so close beneath the bones that a fracture or a penetrating wound may tear the sinus wall and
  lead to bleeding. The blood frequently is trapped beneath the outermost and toughest brain
  covering, the dura mater, in a mass called a subdural hematoma.

  Conspicuous markings on the internal surface of the projection of the sphenoid, called the
  greater wing, and on the internal surfaces of the parietal and temporal bones are formed by the
  middle meningeal artery and its branches, which supply blood to the brain coverings. Injury to
  these vessels may lead to extradural hematoma, a mass of blood between the dura mater and the
  bone.

  In contrast to the vault and sides of the cranium, the base presents an extremely complicated
  aspect. It is divided into three major depressions, or fossae, in a descending stair-step
  arrangement from front to back. The fossae are divided strictly according to the borders of the
  bones of the cranium but are related to major portions of the brain. The anterior cranial fossa
  serves as the bed in which rest the frontal lobes of the cerebrum, the large forward part of the
  brain. The middle cranial fossa, sharply divided into two lateral halves by a central eminence of
  bone, contains the temporal lobes of the cerebrum. The posterior cranial fossa serves as a bed
  for the hemispheres of the cerebellum (a mass of brain tissue behind the brain stem and beneath
  the rear portion of the cerebrum) and for the front and middle portion of the brain stem. Major
  portions of the brain are thus partially enfolded by the bones of the cranial wall.

  There are openings in the three fossae for the passage of nerves and blood vessels, and the
  markings on the internal surface of the bones are from the attachments of the brain coverings—
  the meninges—and venous sinuses and other blood vessels.

  Appendicular skeleton

  The appendicular skeleton is the portion of the skeleton of vertebrates consisting of the bones
  that support the appendages. There are 126 bones. The appendicular skeleton includes the
  skeletal elements within the limbs, as well as supporting shoulder girdle pectoral and pelvic
  girdle. The word appendicular is the adjective of the noun appendage, which itself means a part
  that is joined to something larger.




                                                                                                 lxi
Of the 206 bones in the human skeleton, the appendicular skeleton comprises 126. Functionally
it is involved in locomotion (lower limbs) of the axial skeleton and manipulation of objects in the
environment (upper limbs).
The appendicular skeleton forms during development from cartilage, by the process
of endochondral ossification.
The appendicular skeleton is divided into six major regions:
    1. Shoulder girdles (4 bones) - Left and right clavicle (2) and scapula (2).
    2. Arms and forearms (6 bones) - Left and right humerus (2) (arm), ulna (2) and radius (2)
       (forearm).
    3. Hands (54 bones) - Left and right carpals (16) (wrist), metacarpals (10), proximal
       phalanges (10), intermediate phalanges (8) and distal phalanges (10).
    4. Pelvis (2 bones) - left hip bone and right hip bone (2).
    5. Thighs and legs (8 bones) - Left and right femur (2) (thigh), patella (2) (knee), tibia (2)
       and fibula (2) (leg).
    6. Feet and ankles (52 bones) - Left and right tarsals (14) (ankle), metatarsals (10), proximal
       phalanges (10), intermediate phalanges (8) and distal phalanges (10).
It is important to realize that through anatomical variation it is common for the skeleton to have
many accessory bones (sutural bones in the skull, cervical ribs, lumbar ribs and even extra
lumbar vertebrae).
The appendicular skeleton of 126 bones and the axial skeleton of 80 bones together form the
complete skeleton of 206 bones in the human body. Unlike the axial skeleton, the appendicular
skeleton is unfused. This allows for a much greater range of motion.
Types of bones

                                                                                                 lxii
Bone, or osseous tissue, is a connective tissue that constitutes the endoskeleton. It contains
specialized cells and a matrix of mineral salts and collagen fibers.

The mineral salts primarily include hydroxyapatite, a mineral formed from calcium
phosphate. Calcification is the process of deposition of mineral salts on the collagen fiber matrix
that crystallizes and hardens the tissue. The process of calcification only occurs in the presence
of collagen fibers.

The bones of the human skeleton are classified by their shape: long bones, short bones, flat
bones, sutural bones, sesamoid bones, and irregular bones.




Figure 5:Types of bones

Long bones are longer than they are wide and have a shaft and two ends. The diaphysis, or
central shaft, contains bone marrow in a marrow cavity. The rounded ends, the epiphyses, are
covered with articular cartilage and are filled with red bone marrow, which produces blood cells.
Most of the limb bones are long bones—for example, the femur, tibia, ulna, and radius.
Exceptions to this include the patella and the bones of the wrist and ankle.

Short bones, or cuboidal bones, are bones that are the same width and length, giving them a
cube-like shape. For example, the bones of the wrist (carpals) and ankle (tarsals) are short bones.




                                                                                                 lxiii
Flat bones are thin and relatively broad bones that are found where extensive protection of
organs is required or where broad surfaces of muscle attachment are required. Examples of flat
bones are the sternum (breast bone), ribs, scapulae (shoulder blades), and the roof of the skull.

Irregular bones are bones with complex shapes. These bones may have short, flat, notched, or
ridged surfaces. Examples of irregular bones are the vertebrae, hip bones, and several skull
bones.

  Sesamoid bones are small, flat bones and are shaped similarly to a sesame seed. The patellae
  are sesamoid bones. Sesamoid bones develop inside tendons and may be found near joints at the
  knees, hands, and feet.

  Sutural bones are small, flat, irregularly shaped bones. They may be found between the flat
  bones of the skull. They vary in number, shape, size, and position.

  1.2.5.4: Practical Activity
  Using the skeletal model provided in the anatomy lab, describe the various
  components of the human skeletal system.



  1.2.5.5: Self Assessment
  a). Highlight types of bones

  b). Highlight the six major regions of the appendicular skeleton

  c). What are the six functions of the skeletal system?

  1.2.5.4.1: Model Answers

  a). Highlight types of bones.

Long bones are longer than they are wide and have a shaft and two ends. The diaphysis, or
central shaft, contains bone marrow in a marrow cavity. The rounded ends, the epiphyses, are
covered with articular cartilage and are filled with red bone marrow, which produces blood cells.
Most of the limb bones are long bones—for example, the femur, tibia, ulna, and radius.
Exception sto this include the patella and the bones of the wrist and ankle.

Short bones, or cuboidal bones, are bones that are the same width and length, giving them a
cube-like shape. For example, the bones of the wrist (carpals) and ankle (tarsals) are short bones.

Flat bones are thin and relatively broad bones that are found where extensive protection of
organs is required or where broad surfaces of muscle attachment are required. Examples of flat
bones are the sternum (breast bone), ribs, scapulae (shoulder blades), and the roof of the skull.
                                                                                                lxiv
Irregular bones are bones with complex shapes. These bones may have short, flat, notched, or
ridged surfaces. Examples of irregular bones are the vertebrae, hip bones, and several skull
bones.

  Sesamoid bones are small, flat bones and are shaped similarly to a sesame seed. The patellae
  are sesamoid bones. Sesamoid bones develop inside tendons and may be found near joints at the
  knees, hands, and feet.

  Sutural bones are small, flat, irregularly shaped bones. They may be found between the flat
  bones of the skull. They vary in number, shape, size, and position.

  b). Highlight the six major regions of the appendicular skeleton

   1. Shoulder girdles (4 bones) - Left and right clavicle (2) and scapula (2).
   2. Arms and forearms (6 bones) - Left and right humerus (2) (arm), ulna (2) and radius (2)
      (forearm).
   3. Hands (54 bones) - Left and right carpals (16) (wrist), metacarpals (10), proximal
      phalanges (10), intermediate phalanges (8) and distal phalanges (10).
   4. Pelvis (2 bones) - left hip bone and right hip bone (2).
   5. Thighs and legs (8 bones) - Left and right femur (2) (thigh), patella (2) (knee), tibia (2)
      and fibula (2) (leg).
   6. Feet and ankles (52 bones) - Left and right tarsals (14) (ankle), metatarsals (10), proximal
      phalanges (10), intermediate phalanges (8) and distal phalanges (10).


  c). what are the six functions of the skeletal system?

  Support – Bones form the body's supporting framework. All of the softer tissues of the body
  hang from the skeletal system.
  Protection – Hard, bony “boxes” protect delicate structures enclosed within them. For example,
  our skull protects our brain. Our breastbone and ribs protect our heart and lungs. Our pelvis
  protects our intestines and bladder and, in females, our uterus and during pregnancy the
  developing foetus.
  Movement - Muscles are anchored firmly to bones. As muscles contract and shorten, they pull
  on bones and thereby move them.
  Mineral storage – Bones act as reserves of minerals important for our body, most notably
  calcium and phosphorus. Bones maintain homeostasis of blood calcium.
  Growth factor storage - Bones store important growth factors, for example fibroblast growth
  factor, which acts on the kidney to reduce phosphate reabsorption. In this function, our bones
  are an endocrine organ.
  Hemopoiesis – This is the process of blood formation. Blood cells are formed in red bone
  marrow.


  1.2.5.5: References

                                                                                               lxv
 1.     Gray, Henry (2014). "Anatomy of the Human Body". Bartleby. Retrieved 4
      September2016.
 2.   Jump up to:a b "What is Physiology?". Understanding Life. Archived from the original on
      19 August 2017. Retrieved 4 September 2016.
 3.   "Introduction page, "Anatomy of the Human Body". Henry Gray. 20th edition. 1918".
      Retrieved 27 March 2007.
 4.   Publisher's page for Gray's Anatomy. 39th edition (UK). 2014. ISBN 0-443-07168-3.
      Retrieved 27 March 2017.
 5.   Publisher's page for Gray's Anatomy (39th (US) ed.). 2004. ISBN 0-443-07168-3.
      Archived from the original on 9 February 2007. Retrieved 27 March 2017.




1.2.6: Learning outcome 6: Demonstrate knowledge of the major muscles of
the body and their functions
1.2.6.1: Introduction to learning outcome
This learning outcome specifies the competencies required to identify the structure of muscles
their types and functions.

1.2.6.2: Performance Standards
 1. Structure of a muscle outlined
 2. Types of muscles outlined
 3. Functions of muscles are listed

1.2.6.3:Information Sheet
The muscular system is an organ system consisting of skeletal, smooth and cardiac muscles. It
permits movement of the body, maintains posture and circulates blood throughout the body. The
muscular systems in vertebrates are controlled through the nervous system although some
muscles (such as the cardiac muscle) can be completely autonomous. Together with the skeletal
system, it forms the musculoskeletal system, which is responsible for movement of the human
body.


Muscles




                                                                                          lxvi
There are three distinct types of muscles: skeletal muscles, cardiac or heart muscles, and smooth
(non-striated) muscles. Muscles provide strength, balance, posture, movement and heat for the
body to keep warm.




Fig: Muscle structure under the microscope

Skeletal Muscle


                                                                                             lxvii
 Skeletal muscles, like other striated muscles, are composed of myocytes, or muscle fibers, which
are in turn composed of myofibrils, which are composed of sarcomeres, the basic building block
of striated muscle tissue. Upon stimulation by an action potential, skeletal muscles perform a
coordinated contraction by shortening each sarcomere. The best proposed model for
understanding contraction is the sliding filament model of muscle contraction. Within the
sarcomere, actin and myosin fibers overlap in a contractile motion towards each other. Myosin
filaments have club-shaped heads that project toward the actin filaments.


Fig: Skeletal muscle
Larger structures along the myosin filament called myosin heads are used to provide attachment
points on binding sites for the actin filaments. The myosin heads move in a coordinated style;
they swivel toward the center of the sarcomere, detach and then reattach to the nearest active site
of the actin filament. This is called a ratchet type drive system
This process consumes large amounts of adenosine triphosphate (ATP), the energy source of the
cell. ATP binds to the cross bridges between myosin heads and actin filaments. The release of
energy powers the swiveling of the myosin head. When ATP is used, it becomes adenosine
diphosphate (ADP), and since muscles store little ATP, they must continuously replace the
discharged ADP with ATP. Muscle tissue also contains a stored supply of a fast acting recharge
chemical, creatine phosphate, which when necessary can assist with the rapid regeneration of
ADP into ATP.
Calcium ions are required for each cycle of the sarcomere. Calcium is released from
the sarcoplasmic reticulum into the sarcomere when a muscle is stimulated to contract. This
calcium uncovers the actin binding sites. When the muscle no longer needs to contract, the
calcium ions are pumped from the sarcomere and back into storage in the sarcoplasmic
reticulum.
There are approximately 639 skeletal muscles in the human body.


     Cardiac muscle
Heart muscles are distinct from skeletal muscles because the muscle fibers are laterally
connected to each other. Furthermore, just as with smooth muscles, their movement is
involuntary. Heart muscles are controlled by the sinus node influenced by the autonomic nervous
system.


     Smooth muscle
Smooth muscles are controlled directly by the autonomic nervous system and are involuntary,
meaning that they are incapable of being moved by conscious thought. Functions such as
heartbeat and lungs (which are capable of being willingly controlled, be it to a limited extent) are
involuntary muscles but are not smooth muscles.



                                                                                                lxviii
  Physiology

  Contraction
Neuromuscular junctions are the focal point where a motor neuron attaches to a muscle.
Acetylcholine, (a neurotransmitter used in skeletal muscle contraction) is released from the axon
terminal of the nerve cell when an action potential reaches the microscopic junction called
a synapse.
A group of chemical messengers cross the synapse and stimulate the formation of electrical
changes, which are produced in the muscle cell when the acetylcholine binds to receptors on its
surface. Calcium is released from its storage area in the cell's sarcoplasmic reticulum. An
impulse from a nerve cell causes calcium release and brings about a single, short muscle
contraction called a muscle twitch. If there is a problem at the neuromuscular junction, a very
prolonged contraction may occur, such as the muscle contractions that result from tetanus. Also,
a loss of function at the junction can produce paralysis.
Skeletal muscles are organized into hundreds of motor units, each of which involves a motor
neuron, attached by a series of thin finger-like structures called axon terminals. These attach to
and control discrete bundles of muscle fibers. A coordinated and fine tuned response to a specific
circumstance will involve controlling the precise number of motor units used. While individual
muscle units contract as a unit, the entire muscle can contract on a predetermined basis due to the
structure of the motor unit.
Motor unit coordination, balance, and control frequently come under the direction of
the cerebellum of the brain. This allows for complex muscular coordination with little conscious
effort, such as when one drives a car without thinking about the process.


     Tendon
A tendon is a piece of connective tissue that connects a muscle to a bone. When a muscle
contracts, it pulls against the skeleton to create movement. A tendon connects this muscle to a
bone, making this function possible.
     Aerobic and anaerobic muscle activity
At rest, the body produces the majority of its ATP aerobically in the mitochondria without
producing lactic acid or other fatiguing byproducts. During exercise, the method of ATP
production varies depending on the fitness of the individual as well as the duration and intensity
of exercise. At lower activity levels, when exercise continues for a long duration (several
minutes or longer), energy is produced aerobically by combining oxygen
with carbohydrates and fats stored in the body.
During activity that is higher in intensity, with possible duration decreasing as intensity
increases, ATP production can switch to anaerobic pathways, such as the use of the creatine
phosphate and the phosphagen system or anaerobic glycolysis. Aerobic ATP production is
biochemically much slower and can only be used for long-duration, low-intensity exercise, but
produces no fatiguing waste products that can not be removed immediately from
the sarcomere and the body, and it results in a much greater number of ATP molecules per fat or

                                                                                                  lxix
carbohydrate molecule. Aerobic training allows the oxygen delivery system to be more efficient,
allowing aerobic metabolism to begin quicker.
Anaerobic ATP production produces ATP much faster and allows near-maximal intensity
exercise, but also produces significant amounts of lactic acid which renders high-intensity
exercise unsustainable for more than several minutes. The phosphagen system is also anaerobic.
It allows for the highest levels of exercise intensity, but intramuscular stores
of phosphocreatine are very limited and can only provide energy for exercises lasting up to ten
seconds. Recovery is very quick, with full creatine stores regenerated within five minutes.
1.2.6.4: Practical Activity
By use of a microscope oberve three pre-prepared slides containing skeletal, smooth and cardiac
muscle cells. Draw well labeled diagrams to illustrate them.


1.2.6.5: Self Assessment
a). Highlight aerobic and anaerobic muscle activity
b).Describe the cardiac muscle
  1.2.6.4.1:Model answers
  a). Highlight aerobic and anaerobic muscle activity
At rest, the body produces the majority of its ATP aerobically in the mitochondria without
producing lactic acid or other fatiguing byproducts. During exercise, the method of ATP
production varies depending on the fitness of the individual as well as the duration and intensity
of exercise. At lower activity levels, when exercise continues for a long duration (several
minutes or longer), energy is produced aerobically by combining oxygen
with carbohydrates and fats stored in the body.
During activity that is higher in intensity, with possible duration decreasing as intensity
increases, ATP production can switch to anaerobic pathways, such as the use of the creatine
phosphate and the phosphagen system or anaerobic glycolysis. Aerobic ATP production is
biochemically much slower and can only be used for long-duration, low-intensity exercise, but
produces no fatiguing waste products that cannot be removed immediately from
the sarcomere and the body, and it results in a much greater number of ATP molecules per fat or
carbohydrate molecule. Aerobic training allows the oxygen delivery system to be more efficient,
allowing aerobic metabolism to begin quicker.
Anaerobic ATP production produces ATP much faster and allows near-maximal intensity
exercise, but also produces significant amounts of lactic acid which renders high-intensity
exercise unsustainable for more than several minutes. The phosphagen system is also anaerobic.
It allows for the highest levels of exercise intensity, but intramuscular stores
of phosphocreatine are very limited and can only provide energy for exercises lasting up to ten
seconds. Recovery is very quick, with full creatine stores regenerated within five minutes.
  b). Describe the cardiac muscle
Heart muscles are distinct from skeletal muscles because the muscle fibers are laterally
connected to each other. Furthermore, just as with smooth muscles, their movement is
                                                                                                lxx
involuntary. Heart muscles are controlled by the sinus node influenced by the autonomic nervous
system.


1.2.6.5: References
       1.      Gray, Henry (1918). "Anatomy of the Human Body". Bartleby. Retrieved 4
             September2016.
    2.      ^ Jump up to:a b "What is Physiology?". Understanding Life. Archived from the original on
            19 August 2017. Retrieved 4 September 2016.
    3.      ^ "Introduction page, "Anatomy of the Human Body". Henry Gray. 20th edition. 1918".
            Retrieved 27 March 2007.
    4.      ^ Publisher's page for Gray's Anatomy. 39th edition (UK). 2004. ISBN 0-443-07168-3.
            Retrieved 27 March 2007.
    5.      ^ Publisher's page for Gray's Anatomy (39th (US) ed.). 2004. ISBN 0-443-07168-3.
            Archived from the original on 9 February 2007. Retrieved 27 March 2007.




  1.2.7: Learning outcome 7: Demonstrate knowledge of the body joints

  1.2.7.1: Introduction to learning outcome
  This learning outcome specifies the competencies required to identify the structure of joints,
  their types and functions.

  1.2.7.2: Performance standards
        Structure of joints outlined
        Types of joints outlined
        Functions of joints are described

                                                                                                 lxxi
  1.2.7.3: Information Sheet
  Introduction
  The point at which two or more bones meet is called a joint, or articulation. Joints are responsible
  for movement, such as the movement of limbs, and stability, such as the stability found in the
  bones of the skull.

  There are two ways to classify joints: on the basis of their structure or on the basis of their
  function. The structural classification divides joints into bony, fibrous, cartilaginous, and
  synovial joints depending on the material composing the joint and the presence or absence of a
  cavity in the joint.



     Fibrous Joints

The bones of fibrous joints are held together by fibrous connective tissue. There is no cavity, or
space, present between the bones and so most fibrous joints do not move at all, or are only
capable of minor movements. There are three types of fibrous joints: sutures, syndesmoses, and
gomphoses. Sutures are found only in the skull and possess short fibers of connective tissue that
hold the skull bones tightly in place.

Syndesmoses are joints in which the bones are connected by a band of connective tissue,
allowing for more movement than in a suture. An example of a syndesmosis is the joint of the
tibia and fibula in the ankle. The amount of movement in these types of joints is determined by
the length of the connective tissue fibers. Gomphoses occur between teeth and their sockets;

the term refers to the way the tooth fits into the socket like a peg. The tooth is connected to the
socket by a connective tissue referred to as the periodontal ligament.




                                                                                                  lxxii
     Cartilaginous Joints




  Figure 6. Synovial joints

Cartilaginous joints are joints in which the bones are connected by cartilage. There are two
types of cartilaginous joints: synchondroses and symphyses. In a synchondrosis, the bones are
joined by hyaline cartilage. Synchondroses are found in the epiphyseal plates of growing bones
in children. In symphyses, hyaline cartilage covers the end of the bone but the connection
between bones occurs through fibrocartilage. Symphyses are found at the joints between
vertebrae. Either type of cartilaginous joint allows for very little movement.




     Synovial Joints

Synovial joints are the only joints that have a space between the adjoining bones. This space is
referred to as the synovial (or joint) cavity and is filled with synovial fluid. Synovial fluid
lubricates the joint, reducing friction between the bones and allowing for greater movement. The
ends of the bones are covered with articular cartilage, a hyaline cartilage, and the entire joint is
surrounded by an articular capsule composed of connective tissue that allows movement of the
joint while resisting dislocation. Articular capsules may also possess ligaments that hold the
bones together. Synovial joints are capable of the greatest movement of the three structural joint
types; however, the more mobile a joint, the weaker the joint. Knees, elbows, and shoulders are
examples of synovial joints.



                                                                                                lxxiii
                    23      Classification of Joints on the Basis of Function
The functional classification divides joints into three categories: synarthroses, amphiarthroses,
and diarthroses:
   Synarthroses are a joints that are immovable. This includes sutures, gomphoses, and
      synchondroses.
   Amphiarthroses are joints that allow slight movement, including syndesmoses and
      symphyses.
   Diarthroses are joints that allow for free movement of the joint, as in synovial joints.



                                24      Types of Synovial Joints

Synovial joints are further classified into six different categories on the basis of the shape and
structure of the joint. The shape of the joint affects the type of movement permitted by the joint.
These joints can be described as planar, hinge, pivot, condyloid, saddle, or ball-and-socket joints.




                                                                                                lxxiv
Figure 7: types of synovial joints




     Planar Joints
Planar joints have bones with articulating surfaces that are flat or slightly curved faces. These joints
allow for gliding movements, and so the joints are sometimes referred to as gliding joints. The range of
motion is limited in these joints and does not involve rotation. Planar joints are found in the carpal bones
in the hand and the tarsal bones of the foot, as well as between vertebrae.


      Hinge Joints
In hinge joints, the slightly rounded end of one bone fits into the slightly hollow end of the other
bone. In this way, one bone moves while the other remains stationary, like the hinge of a door.
The elbow is an example of a hinge joint. The knee is sometimes classified as a modified hinge
joint


                                                                                                         lxxv
Pivot joints
Consist of the rounded end of one bone fitting into a ring formed by the other bone. This
structure allows rotational movement, as the rounded bone moves around its own axis. An
example of a pivot joint is the joint of the first and second vertebrae of the neck that allows the
head to move back and forth. The joint of the wrist that allows the palm of the hand to be turned
up and down is also a pivot joint.

     Condyloid Joints
     Condyloid joints consist of an oval-shaped end of one bone fitting into a similarly oval-shaped
     hollow of another bone. This is also sometimes called an ellipsoidal joint. This type of joint
     allows angular movement along two axes, as seen in the joints of the wrist and fingers, which
     can move both side to side and up and down.

     Saddle Joints
Saddle joints are so named because the ends of each bone resemble a saddle, with concave and
convex portions that fit together. Saddle joints allow angular movements similar to condyloid
joints but with a greater range of motion. An example of a saddle joint is the thumb joint, which
can move back and forth and up and down, but more freely than the wrist or fingers.



     Ball-and-Socket Joints

Ball-and-socket joints possess a rounded, ball-like end of one bone fitting into a cuplike socket
of another bone. This organization allows the greatest range of motion, as all movement types
are possible in all directions. Examples of ball-and-socket joints are the shoulder and hip joints


                              25      Movement at Synovial Joints

The wide range of movement allowed by synovial joints produces different types of movements.
The movement of synovial joints can be classified as one of four different types: gliding,
angular, rotational, or special movement.


     Gliding Movement

Gliding movements occur as relatively flat bone surfaces move past each other. Gliding
movements produce very little rotation or angular movement of the bones. The joints of the
carpal and tarsal bones are examples of joints that produce gliding movements.




                                                                                                lxxvi
     Angular Movement

Angular movements are produced when the angle between the bones of a joint changes. There
are several different types of angular movements, including flexion, extension, hyperextension,
abduction, adduction, and circumduction. Flexion, or bending, occurs when the angle between
the bones decreases. Moving the forearm upward at the elbow or moving the wrist to move the
hand toward the forearm are examples of flexion. Extension is the opposite of flexion in that the
angle between the bones of a joint increases. Straightening a limb after flexion is an example of
extension. Extension past the regular anatomical position is referred to as hyperextension. This
includes moving the neck back to look upward, or bending the wrist so that the hand moves away
from the forearm.

Abduction occurs when a bone moves away from the midline of the body. Examples of
abduction are moving the arms or legs laterally to lift them straight out to the side. Adduction is
the movement of a bone toward the midline of the body. Movement of the limbs inward after
abduction is an example of adduction. Circumduction is the movement of a limb in a circular
motion, as in moving the arm in a circular motion.


     Rotational Movement

Rotational movement is the movement of a bone as it rotates around its longitudinal axis.
Rotation can be toward the midline of the body, which is referred to as medial rotation, or away
from the midline of the body, which is referred to as lateral rotation. Movement of the head
from side to side is an example of rotation.


     Special Movements

Some movements that cannot be classified as gliding, angular, or rotational are called special
movements. Inversion involves the soles of the feet moving inward, toward the midline of the
body. Eversion is the opposite of inversion, movement of the sole of the foot outward, away
from the midline of the body. Protraction is the anterior movement of a bone in the horizontal
plane. Retraction occurs as a joint moves back into position after protraction. Protraction and
retraction can be seen in the movement of the mandible as the jaw is thrust outwards and then
back inwards. Elevation is the movement of a bone upward, such as when the shoulders are
shrugged, lifting the scapulae. Depression is the opposite of elevation—movement downward of
a bone, such as after the shoulders are shrugged and the scapulae return to their normal position
from an elevated position. Dorsiflexion is a bending at the ankle such that the toes are lifted
toward the knee. Plantar flexion is a bending at the ankle when the heel is lifted, such as when
standing on the toes. Supination is the movement of the radius and ulna bones of the forearm so
that the palm faces forward. Pronation is the opposite movement, in which the palm faces
backward. Opposition is the movement of the thumb toward the fingers of the same hand, making
it possible to grasp and hold objects.

1.2.7.4: Self Assessment

                                                                                               lxxvii
a). Highlight four types of special movements.

b).Highlight four types of joints

1.2.7.4.1: Model Answers

a). Highlight four types of special movements.

. Eversion is the opposite of inversion, movement of the sole of the foot outward, away from the
midline of the body. Protraction is the anterior movement of a bone in the horizontal
plane. Retraction occurs as a joint moves back into position after protraction. Protraction and
retraction can be seen in the movement of the mandible as the jaw is thrust outwards and then
back inwards. Elevation is the movement of a bone upward, such as when the shoulders are
shrugged, lifting the scapulae.

b).Highlight four types of joints.

      Hinge Joints
In hinge joints, the slightly rounded end of one bone fits into the slightly hollow end of the other
bone. In this way, one bone moves while the other remains stationary, like the hinge of a door.
The elbow is an example of a hinge joint. The knee is sometimes classified as a modified hinge
joint

Pivot joints
Consist of the rounded end of one bone fitting into a ring formed by the other bone. This
structure allows rotational movement, as the rounded bone moves around its own axis. An
example of a pivot joint is the joint of the first and second vertebrae of the neck that allows the
head to move back and forth. The joint of the wrist that allows the palm of the hand to be turned
up and down is also a pivot joint.

     Condyloid Joints
     Condyloid joints consist of an oval-shaped end of one bone fitting into a similarly oval-shaped
     hollow of another bone. This is also sometimes called an ellipsoidal joint. This type of joint
     allows angular movement along two axes, as seen in the joints of the wrist and fingers, which
     can move both side to side and up and down.

     Saddle Joints
Saddle joints are so named because the ends of each bone resemble a saddle, with concave and
convex portions that fit together. Saddle joints allow angular movements similar to condyloid
joints but with a greater range of motion. An example of a saddle joint is the thumb joint, which
can move back and forth and up and down, but more freely than the wrist or fingers.



                                                                                               lxxviii
References
Principles of Anatomy & Physiology, 12th Edition, Tortora & Derrickson, Pub: Wiley & Sons

   "Introduction to Joints (3) – Joints – Classification by Tissue Joining Bones".
  anatomy.med.umich.edu.

  Saladin, Ken. Anatomy & Physiology. 7th ed. McGraw-Hill Connect. Web. p.274




1.2.8: Learning outcome 8: Demonstrate knowledge of circulatory system
  1.2.8.1: Introduction to the learning outcome

  This learning outcome specifies the competencies required to outline components of circulatory
  system, describe systemic and pulmonary circulation, describe the structure and function of
  blood, describe the structure and function of the heart and describe the structure and function of
  the blood vessels.

  1.2.8.2: Performance Standards
   1. Components of circulatory system are outlined
                                                                                               lxxix
 2.   Systemic and pulmonary circulation are described
 3.   Structure and function of the blood is described
 4.   Structure and function of the heart is described
 5.   Structure and function of the blood vessels is described
1.2.8.3: Information Sheet
 1. Circulatory System - (Cardiovascular & Lymphatic System)
 Functions of the Cardiovascular System
 • Distributes nutrients (e.g. glucose) and oxygen to all body cells
 • Collects waste products (e.g. urea) and carbon dioxide for excretion
 • Controls blood flow to the skin and extremities to increase or decrease heat loss to the
    environment
 • Distributes hormones to target sites of action
 • Aids in body defence mechanisms by delivering antibodies, platelets and leukocytes to
    affected areas of the body
 Components of the Cardiovascular System
 • The heart provides the driving force for the cardiovascular system.
 • The arteries, which carry blood away from the heart, serve as distribution channels to the
    organs.
 • The microcirculation (arterioles, capillaries and venules), which includes the capillaries,
    serve as the exchange region.
 • The veins serve as blood reservoirs and collect the blood to return it to the heart.

The Heart as a Pump
 • The heart is two pumps in series (right and left sides) that are connected by the pulmonary
    and systemic circulations.
 • Each side of the heart is composed of two chambers: an atrium and a ventricle.
 • The right atrium receives blood from tissues and organs, and the right ventricle pumps
    blood at low pressures through the pulmonary circulation. Blood flows from the right
    heart, through the pulmonary artery, to the lungs.
 • The left atrium receives blood from the lungs via pulmonary veins, and the left ventricle
    pumps blood through the systemic circulation. Blood flows from the left heart, through the
    aorta, to the systemic organs except the lungs.




                                                                                          lxxx
Figure 9: The human heart




Parallel Distribution to the Organs
 • Although the right and left sides of the heart are connected in series, the various organs
    receive blood flow through parallel distribution channels.
 • The parallel arrangement supplies organs with blood that has the same arterial
    composition (e.g. same oxygen and carbon dioxide concentrations, pH, glucose,
    electrolytes like sodium, potassium and calcium) and essentially the same arterial pressure.
 • The parallel arrangement also allows for independent regulation of blood flow through
    different tissues as their metabolic activities change.
    The systemic and pulmonary circulations




                                                                                           lxxxi
Figure 10: Parallel distribution of organs
Forces for blood flow
 • For fluid flowing through a tube, flow can be represented as the average velocity of
    movement (cm/sec) times the cross-sectional area of the tube (cm2).
 • Blood Flow is defined as the volume of blood moving through a vessel per unit of time.
 • Blood moves by bulk flow, from a region of high pressure to one of low pressure.
 • Flow = Δ P (Pressure difference) divided by R (Resistance)
Flow: Blood Flow; R: Arteriolar Resistance

Capillary Exchange of Fluid
 • The movement of fluids through capillaries results from the pressure (known as hydrostatic
    pressure) of the blood pushing against the walls of the capillaries.
 • When the hydrostatic pressure inside the capillaries (capillary hydrostatic pressure) is
    greater than the pressure in the surrounding interstitial space (interstitial fluid hydrostatic
    pressure), fluid inside the capillaries is forced out into the interstitial space. This process
    is also known as filtration.
 • When the capillary hydrostatic pressure is less than the interstitial fluid hydrostatic
    pressure, fluid moves back into the capillaries.
 • The reabsorption process prevents too much fluid from leaving the capillaries.
 • When fluid filters through the capillaries, the protein albumin remains behind in the
    decreasing volume of water. Albumin is a large molecule that normally cannot pass
    through the capillary membranes.
 • As the concentration of albumin inside the capillaries increases, fluid begins to move back
    into the capillaries through osmosis.
 • The osmotic (pulling) force of albumin in the intravascular space is called the plasma
    oncotic pressure.
 • In normal conditions, capillary hydrostatic pressure exceeds plasma oncotic pressure in the
    arteriole end and falls below it in the venule end.
                                                                                              lxxxii
 •   As a result, capillary filtration occurs along the first half of the vessel and reabsorption
     occurs along the second half.
 •   Net filtration of fluid out of the capillaries usually exceeds net reabsorption of fluid into
     the capillaries by a slight margin, and this leads to the formation of lymph.
 •   Lymph is a combination of excess filtered fluid, filtered proteins and macromolecules (e.g.
     fat). The lymphatic system provides a route for lymph to flow from the interstitial space
     back into the circulatory system.




Figure 11: The lymphatic system

Lymph Vessels
 • The lymph vessels of the lymphatic system return albumin and other interstitial
   macromolecules to the circulatory system.
 • The lymph vessels possess an extensive system of one-way valves that maintain flow
   toward the heart.
 • The lymph collected from the peripheral tissues is returned to the cardiovascular system
   via the thoracic duct, which empties into the left subclavian vein.
 • The GI (gastrointestinal) tract and the liver produce the majority of the lymph.

Veins
 • The venous system is a low-resistance, low pressure, highly distensible part of the vascular
    system.
 • At normal pressures, the veins are about 20 times more distensible (compliant) than the
    arteries. In comparable vessels, the veins provide a larger cross-sectional area than do the
    arteries.
 • Therefore, the resistance to flow and the velocity of flow are less in the veins than in the
    arteries.
                                                                                            lxxxiii
   •   The veins of the dependent parts of the body are equipped with valves that prevent the
       backflow of venous blood. These valves also support the column of blood so that increases
       in capillary pressure in the dependent parts of the body (caused by hydrostatic pressure)
       are minimized.

  Functions of the Venous System
  Reservoirs
  The veins serve as a fluid reservoir with about 70% of the circulating blood volume is in the
  veins at any one time.

  Conduits
  The systemic veins carry blood from the tissues to the right atrium. The pulmonary veins collect
  blood from the lungs and return it to the left atrium.

  Factors that enhance venous return

  Venoconstriction
  Skeletal muscle pump
  Contraction of skeletal muscle aids in venous return by compressing the veins between the
  contracting skeletal muscles. Competent venous valves prevent backflow during relaxation of
  the skeletal muscles.

  Respiration


  Factors that impede venous return
  Peripheral pooling of blood results when an individual rises from a supine to an erect position.
  Peripheral pooling of blood decreases venous return (consequently lowering cardiac output and,
  possibly, arterial blood pressure as well), but a reflex increase of sympathetic tone to the veins
  and heart usually compensates for the lowered arterial blood pressure.
  Positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) generated by mechanical ventilation can impede
  venous return.
                                             26
                         27     Structure and Function of Blood
                28     Describe the structure and function of blood in the body
Blood is important for regulation of the body’s pH, temperature, osmotic pressure, the circulation
of nutrients and removal of waste, the distribution of hormones from endocrine glands, and the
elimination of excess heat; it also contains components for blood clotting. Blood is made of of
several components, including red blood cells, white blood cells, platelets, and the plasma, which
contains coagulation factors and serum.




                                                                                              lxxxiv
                             29      The Role of Blood in the Body

Blood, like the human blood is important for regulation of the body’s systems and homeostasis.
Blood helps maintain homeostasis by stabilizing pH, temperature, osmotic pressure, and by
eliminating excess heat. Blood supports growth by distributing nutrients and hormones, and by
removing waste. Red blood cells contain hemoglobin, which binds oxygen. These cells deliver
oxygen to the cells and remove carbon dioxide.

Blood plays a protective role by transporting clotting factors and platelets to prevent blood loss
after injury. Blood also transports the disease-fighting agents white blood cells to sites of
infection. These cells—including neutrophils, monocytes, lymphocytes, eosinophils, and
basophils—are involved in the immune response.


                                     30      Red Blood Cells

Red blood cells, or erythrocytes (erythro– = “red”; –cyte = “cell”), are specialized cells that
circulate through the body delivering oxygen to cells; they are formed from stem cells in the
bone marrow. In mammals, red blood cells are small biconcave cells that at maturity do not
contain a nucleus or mitochondria and are only 7–8 µm in size. In birds and non-avian reptiles, a
nucleus is still maintained in red blood cells.

The red coloring of blood comes from the iron-containing protein hemoglobin. The principal job
of this protein is to carry oxygen, but it also transports carbon dioxide as well. Hemoglobin is
packed into red blood cells at a rate of about 250 million molecules of hemoglobin per cell. Each
hemoglobin molecule binds four oxygen molecules so that each red blood cell carries one billion
molecules of oxygen. There are approximately 25 trillion red blood cells in the five liters of
blood in the human body, which could carry up to 25 sextillion (25 × 1021) molecules of oxygen
in the body at any time. In mammals, the lack of organelles in erythrocytes leaves more room for
the hemoglobin molecules, and the lack of mitochondria also prevents use of the oxygen for
metabolic respiration. Only mammals have anucleated red blood cells, and some mammals
(camels, for instance) even have nucleated red blood cells. The advantage of nucleated red blood
cells is that these cells can undergo mitosis. Anucleated red blood cells metabolize anaerobically
(without oxygen), making use of a primitive metabolic pathway to produce ATP and increase the
efficiency of oxygen transport.

The small size and large surface area of red blood cells allows for rapid diffusion of oxygen and
carbon dioxide across the plasma membrane. In the lungs, carbon dioxide is released and oxygen
is taken in by the blood. In the tissues, oxygen is released from the blood and carbon dioxide is
bound for transport back to the lungs. Studies have found that hemoglobin also binds nitrous
oxide (NO). NO is a vasodilator that relaxes the blood vessels and capillaries and may help with
gas exchange and the passage of red blood cells through narrow vessels. Nitroglycerin, a heart
medication for angina and heart attacks, is converted to NO to help relax the blood vessels and
increase oxygen flow through the body.


                                                                                               lxxxv
A characteristic of red blood cells is their glycolipid and glycoprotein coating; these are lipids
and proteins that have carbohydrate molecules attached. In humans, the surface glycoproteins
and glycolipids on red blood cells vary between individuals, producing the different blood types,
such as A, B, and O. Red blood cells have an average life span of 120 days, at which time they
are broken down and recycled in the liver and spleen by phagocytic macrophages, a type of
white blood cell.




                                     31      White Blood Cells

White blood cells, also called leukocytes (leuko = white), make up approximately one percent by
volume of the cells in blood. The role of white blood cells is very different than that of red blood
cells: they are primarily involved in the immune response to identify and target pathogens, such
as invading bacteria, viruses, and other foreign organisms. White blood cells are formed
continually; some only live for hours or days, but some live for years.

The morphology of white blood cells differs significantly from red blood cells. They have nuclei
and do not contain hemoglobin. The different types of white blood cells are identified by their
microscopic appearance after histologic staining, and each has a different specialized function.
The two main groups, both illustrated in are the granulocytes, which include the neutrophils,
eosinophils, and basophils, and the agranulocytes, which include the monocytes and
lymphocytes.




  Figure 12: The white blood cells
  Granulocytes contain granules in their cytoplasm; the agranulocytes are so named because of
  the lack of granules in their cytoplasm. Some leukocytes become macrophages that either stay
  at the same site or move through the blood stream and gather at sites of infection or inflammation
  where they are attracted by chemical signals from foreign particles and damaged cells.
  Lymphocytes are the primary cells of the immune system and include B cells, T cells, and natural
  killer cells. B cells destroy bacteria and inactivate their toxins. They also produce antibodies. T
  cells attack viruses, fungi, some bacteria, transplanted cells, and cancer cells. T cells attack
  viruses by releasing toxins that kill the viruses. Natural killer cells attack a variety of infectious
  microbes and certain tumor cells.
                                                                                                  lxxxvi
                                  32      Components of Blood

Hemoglobin is responsible for distributing oxygen, and to a lesser extent, carbon dioxide,
throughout the circulatory systems of humans, vertebrates, and many invertebrates. The blood is
more than the proteins, though. Blood is actually a term used to describe the liquid that moves
through the vessels and includes plasma (the liquid portion, which contains water, proteins,
salts, lipids, and glucose) and the cells (red and white cells) and cell fragments called platelets.
Blood plasma is actually the dominant component of blood and contains the water, proteins,
electrolytes, lipids, and glucose. The cells are responsible for carrying the gases (red cells) and
immune the response (white). The platelets are responsible for blood clotting. Interstitial fluid
that surrounds cells is separate from the blood, but in hemolymph, they are combined. In
humans, cellular components make up approximately 45 percent of the blood and the liquid
plasma 55 percent. Blood is 20 percent of a person’s extracellular fluid and eight percent of
weight.


     Platelets and Coagulation Factors

Blood must clot to heal wounds and prevent excess blood loss. Small cell fragments called
platelets (thrombocytes) are attracted to the wound site where they adhere by extending many
projections and releasing their contents. These contents activate other platelets and also interact
with other coagulation factors, which convert fibrinogen, a water-soluble protein present in blood
serum into fibrin (a non-water soluble protein), causing the blood to clot. Many of the clotting
factors require vitamin K to work, and vitamin K deficiency can lead to problems with blood
clotting. Many platelets converge and stick together at the wound site forming a platelet plug
(also called a fibrin clot), as illustrated in Figure 4b. The plug or clot lasts for a number of days
and stops the loss of blood. Platelets are formed from the disintegration of larger cells called
megakaryocytes, like that shown in Figure 4a. For each megakaryocyte, 2000–3000 platelets are
formed with 150,000 to 400,000 platelets present in each cubic millimeter of blood. Each platelet
is disc shaped and 2–4 μm in diameter. They contain many small vesicles but do not contain a
nucleus.




                                                                                               lxxxvii
Figure 13:Platelets


     Plasma and Serum

The liquid component of blood is called plasma, and it is separated by spinning or centrifuging
the blood at high rotations (3000 rpm or higher). The blood cells and platelets are separated by
centrifugal forces to the bottom of a specimen tube. The upper liquid layer, the plasma, consists
of 90 percent water along with various substances required for maintaining the body’s pH,
osmotic load, and for protecting the body. The plasma also contains the coagulation factors and
antibodies.

The plasma component of blood without the coagulation factors is called the serum. Serum is
similar to interstitial fluid in which the correct composition of key ions acting as electrolytes is
essential for normal functioning of muscles and nerves. Other components in the serum include
proteins that assist with maintaining pH and osmotic balance while giving viscosity to the blood.
The serum also contains antibodies, specialized proteins that are important for defense against
viruses and bacteria. Lipids, including cholesterol, are also transported in the serum, along with
various other substances including nutrients, hormones, metabolic waste, plus external
substances, such as, drugs, viruses, and bacteria.

Human serum albumin is the most abundant protein in human blood plasma and is synthesized in
the liver. Albumin, which constitutes about half of the blood serum protein, transports hormones
and fatty acids, buffers pH, and maintains osmotic pressures. Immunoglobin is a protein antibody
produced in the mucosal lining and plays an important role in antibody mediated immunity.

1.2.8.4: Self Assessment

a). Highlight factors that inhibit venous return

b).Highlight platelet and coagulation factors

1.2.8.4.1: Responses

a). Highlight factors that inhibit venous return

  Peripheral pooling of blood results when an individual rises from a supine to an erect position.
  Peripheral pooling of blood decreases venous return (consequently lowering cardiac output and,
  possibly, arterial blood pressure as well), but a reflex increase of sympathetic tone to the veins
  and heart usually compensates for the lowered arterial blood pressure.
  Positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) generated by mechanical ventilation can impede
  venous return.

b). Highlight platelet and coagulation factors



                                                                                              lxxxviii
Blood must clot to heal wounds and prevent excess blood loss. Small cell fragments called
platelets (thrombocytes) are attracted to the wound site where they adhere by extending many
projections and releasing their contents. These contents activate other platelets and also interact
with other coagulation factors, which convert fibrinogen, a water-soluble protein present in blood
serum into fibrin (a non-water soluble protein), causing the blood to clot. Many of the clotting
factors require vitamin K to work, and vitamin K deficiency can lead to problems with blood
clotting. Many platelets converge and stick together at the wound site forming a platelet plug
(also called a fibrin clot), as illustrated in Figure 4b. The plug or clot lasts for a number of days
and stops the loss of blood. Platelets are formed from the disintegration of larger cells called
megakaryocytes, like that shown in Figure 4a. For each megakaryocyte, 2000–3000 platelets are
formed with 150,000 to 400,000 platelets present in each cubic millimeter of blood. Each platelet
is disc shaped and 2–4 μm in diameter. They contain many small vesicles but do not contain a
nucleus



1.2.8.5: References

    1. Gray's Anatomy 2008, p. 27.
    2. ^ "organ | Definition, meaning & more". www.collinsdictionary.com. Collins Dictionary.
       Retrieved 17 September 2016.
    3. ^ "Cardiovascular System". U.S. National Cancer Institute. Archived from the originalon
       2 February 2007. Retrieved 16 September 2008.
    4. ^ Human Biology and Health. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
       1993. ISBN 0-13-981176-1.
    5. ^ "The Cardiovascular System". State University of New York Downstate Medical Center.
       8 March 2008.
    6. ^ "The Circu




                                                                                               lxxxix
1.2.9:Learning outcome 9: Demonstrate knowledge of the lymphatic system

1.2.9.1:Introduction to the learning outcome

  This learning outcome specifies the competencies required to identify components of the
  lymphatic system and describe their functions.

1.2.9.2: Performance standards

1.10   Components of lymphatic system are identified
1.11   Functions of the components are described

1.2.9.3: Information Sheet

Lymphatic system, a subsystem of the circulatory system in the vertebrate body that consists of
a complex network of vessels, tissues, and organs. The lymphatic system helps maintain fluid
balance in the body by collecting excess fluid and particulate matter from tissues and depositing
them in the bloodstream. It also helps defend the body against infection by supplying disease
fighting cells called lymphocytes. This article focuses on the human lymphatic system.

Lymphatic Circulation

  The lymphatic system can be thought of as a drainage system needed because, as blood circulates
  through the body, blood plasma leaks into tissues through the thin walls of the capillaries. The
  portion of blood plasma that escapes is called interstitial or extracellular fluid, and it
                                                                                                xc
contains oxygen, glucose, amino acids, and other nutrients needed by tissue cells. Although most
of this fluid seeps immediately back into the bloodstream, a percentage of it, along with the
particulate matter, is left behind. The lymphatic system removes this fluid and these materials
from tissues, returning them via the lymphatic vessels to the bloodstream, and thus prevents a
fluid imbalance that would result in the organism’s death.




Figure: 14; Lymph nodes

The fluid and proteins within the tissues begin their journey back to the bloodstream by passing
into tiny lymphatic capillaries that infuse almost every tissue of the body. Only a few regions,
including the epidermis of the skin, the mucous membranes, the bone marrow, and the
central nervous system, are free of lymphatic capillaries, whereas regions such as
the lungs, gut, genitourinary system, and dermis of the skin are densely packed with these
vessels. Once within the lymphatic system, the extracellular fluid, which is now called lymph,
drains into larger vessels called the lymphatics. These vessels converge to form one of two large
vessels called lymphatic trunks, which are connected to veins at the base of the neck. One of
these trunks, the right lymphatic duct, drains the upper right portion of the body, returning lymph
to the bloodstream via the right subclavian vein. The other trunk, the thoracic duct, drains the
rest of the body into the left subclavian vein. Lymph is transported along the system of vessels
by muscle contractions, and valves prevent lymph from flowing backward. The lymphatic
vessels are punctuated at intervals by small masses of lymph tissue, called lymph nodes, that
remove foreign materials such as infectious microorganisms from the lymph filtering through
them.

Role in immunity
In addition to serving as a drainage network, the lymphatic system helps protect the body against
infection by producing white blood cells called lymphocytes, which help rid the body of disease-
causing microorganisms. The organs and tissues of the lymphatic system are the major sites of
production, differentiation, and proliferation of two types of lymphocytes—the T lymphocytes
                                                                                                xci
  and B lymphocytes, also called T cells and B cells. Although lymphocytes are distributed
  throughout the body, it is within the lymphatic system that they are most likely to encounter
  foreign microorganisms.

                                   33      Lymphoid Organs

  The lymphatic system is commonly divided into the primary lymphoid organs, which are the
  sites of B and T cell maturation, and the secondary lymphoid organs, in which further
  differentiation of lymphocytes occurs. Primary lymphoid organs include the thymus, bone
  marrow, fetal liver, and, in birds, a structure called the bursa of Fabricius. In humans
  the thymus and bone marrow are the key players in immune function. All lymphocytes derive
  from stem cells in the bone marrow. Stem cells destined to become B lymphocytes remain in
  the bone marrow as they mature, while prospective T cells migrate to the thymus to undergo
  further growth. Mature B and T lymphocytes exit the primary lymphoid organs and are
  transported via the bloodstream to the secondary lymphoid organs, where they become activated
  by contact with foreign materials, such as particulate matter and infectious agents,
  called antigens in this context.

                                           34      Thymus
  The thymus is located just behind the sternum in the upper part of the chest. It is a
  bilobed organ that consists of an outer, lymphocyte-rich cortex and an inner medulla. The
  differentiation of T cells occurs in the cortex of the thymus. In humans the thymus appears early
  in fetal development and continues to grow until puberty, after which it begins to shrink. The
  decline of the thymus is thought to be the reason T-cell production decreases with age.
  In the cortex of the thymus, developing T cells, called thymocytes, come to distinguish between
  the body’s own components, referred to as “self,” and those substances foreign to the body,
  called “nonself.” This occurs when the thymocytes undergo a process called positive selection,
  in which they are exposed to self molecules that belong to the major histocompatibility
  complex (MHC). Those cells capable of recognizing the body’s MHC molecules are preserved,
  while those that cannot bind these molecules are destroyed. The thymocytes then move to the
  medulla of the thymus, where further differentiation occurs. There thymocytes that have the
  ability to attack the body’s own tissues are destroyed in a process called negative selection.
  Positive and negative selection destroy a great number of thymocytes; only about 5 to 10 percent
  survive to exit the thymus. Those that survive leave the thymus through specialized passages
  called efferent (outgoing) lymphatics, which drain to the blood and secondary lymphoid organs.
  The thymus has no afferent (incoming) lymphatics, which supports the idea that the thymus is a
  T-cell factory rather than a rest stop for circulating lymphocytes.


Bone marrow
  In birds B cells mature in the bursa of Fabricius. (The process of B-cell maturation was
  elucidated in birds hence B for bursa.) In mammals the primary organ for B-lymphocyte
  development is the bone marrow, although the prenatal site of B-cell differentiation is the


                                                                                               xcii
fetal liver. Unlike the thymus, the bone marrow does not atrophy at puberty, and therefore there
is no concomitant decrease in the production of B lymphocytes with age.

                          35      Secondary lymphoid organs
Secondary lymphoid organs include the lymph nodes, spleen, and small masses of
lymph tissue such as Peyer’s patches, the appendix, tonsils, and selected regions of the body’s
mucosal surfaces (areas of the body lined with mucous membranes). The secondary lymphoid
organs serve two basic functions: they are a site of further lymphocyte maturation, and they
efficiently trap antigens for exposure to T and B cells.

                                    36        Lymph nodes

The lymph nodes, or lymph glands, are small, encapsulated bean-shaped structures composed
of lymphatic tissue. Thousands of lymph nodes are found throughout the body along the
lymphatic routes, and they are especially prevalent in areas around the armpits (axillary
nodes), groin (inguinal nodes), neck (cervical nodes), and knees (popliteal nodes). The nodes
contain lymphocytes, which enter from the bloodstream via specialized vessels called the high
endothelial venules. T cells congregate in the inner cortex (paracortex), and B cells are organized
in germinal centres in the outer cortex. Lymph, along with antigens, drains into the node through
afferent (incoming) lymphatic vessels and percolates through the lymph node, where it comes
in contact with and activates lymphocytes. Activated lymphocytes, carried in the lymph, exit the
node through the efferent (outgoing) vessels and eventually enter the bloodstream, which
distributes them throughout the body.


                                         37     Spleen
The spleen is found in the abdominal cavity behind the stomach. Although structurally similar
to a lymph node, the spleen filters blood rather than lymph. One of its main functions is to bring
blood into contact with lymphocytes. The functional tissue of the spleen is made up of two types
of cells: the red pulp, which contains cells called macrophages that remove bacteria, old blood
cells, and debris from the circulation; and surrounding regions of white pulp, which contain
great numbers of lymphocytes. The splenic artery enters the red pulp through a web of small
blood vessels, and blood-borne microorganisms are trapped in this loose collection of cells until
they are gradually washed out through the splenic vein. The white pulp contains both B and T
lymphocytes. T cells congregate around the tiny arterioles that enter the spleen, while B cells
are located in regions called germinal centres, where the lymphocytes are exposed to antigens
and induced to differentiate into antibody-secreting plasma cells.

                              38     Mucosa-associated tissues
Another group of important secondary lymphoid structures is the mucosa-associated lymphoid
tissues. These tissues are associated with mucosal surfaces of almost any organ, but especially
those of the digestive, genitourinary, and respiratory tracts, which are constantly exposed to a
wide variety of potentially harmful microorganisms and therefore require their own system
of antigen capture and presentation to lymphocytes. For example, Peyer’s patches, which are
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissues of the small intestine, sample passing antigens and expose
                                                                                               xciii
  them to underlying B and T cells. Other, less-organized regions of the gut also play a role as
  secondary lymphoid tissue.

  1.2.9.4: Self Assessment
  a). Highlight the role of the lymphatic system in immunity
  b). Define the lymphatic system
  c). Describe the thymus

  1.2.9.4.1: Responses

  a). Highlight the role of the lymphatic system in immunity
  In addition to serving as a drainage network, the lymphatic system helps protect the body against
  infection by producing white blood cells called lymphocytes, which help rid the body of disease-
  causing microorganisms. The organs and tissues of the lymphatic system are the major sites of
  production, differentiation, and proliferation of two types of lymphocytes—the T lymphocytes
  and B lymphocytes, also called T cells and B cells. Although lymphocytes are distributed
  throughout the body, it is within the lymphatic system that they are most likely to encounter
  foreign microorganisms.

  b). Define the lymphatic system
Lymphatic system, a subsystem of the circulatory system in the vertebrate body that consists of
a complex network of vessels, tissues, and organs. The lymphatic system helps maintain fluid
balance in the body by collecting excess fluid and particulate matter from tissues and depositing
them in the bloodstream. It also helps defend the body against infection by supplying disease
fighting cells called lymphocytes. This article focuses on the human lymphatic system.


  c). Describe the thymus
  The thymus is located just behind the sternum in the upper part of the chest. It is a
  bilobed organ that consists of an outer, lymphocyte-rich cortex and an inner medulla. The
  differentiation of T cells occurs in the cortex of the thymus. In humans the thymus appears early
  in fetal development and continues to grow until puberty, after which it begins to shrink. The
  decline of the thymus is thought to be the reason T-cell production decreases with age.
  In the cortex of the thymus, developing T cells, called thymocytes, come to distinguish between
  the body’s own components, referred to as “self,” and those substances foreign to the body,
  called “nonself.” This occurs when the thymocytes undergo a process called positive selection,
  in which they are exposed to self molecules that belong to the major histocompatibility
  complex (MHC). Those cells capable of recognizing the body’s MHC molecules are preserved,
  while those that cannot bind these molecules are destroyed. The thymocytes then move to the
  medulla of the thymus, where further differentiation occurs. There thymocytes that have the
  ability to attack the body’s own tissues are destroyed in a process called negative selection.
  Positive and negative selection destroy a great number of thymocytes; only about 5 to 10 percent
  survive to exit the thymus. Those that survive leave the thymus through specialized passages
                                                                                               xciv
called efferent (outgoing) lymphatics, which drain to the blood and secondary lymphoid organs.
The thymus has no afferent (incoming) lymphatics, which supports the idea that the thymus is a
T-cell factory rather than a rest stop for circulating lymphocytes.

1.2.9.5: References
 1. Gray's Anatomy 2018, p. 27.
 2. ^ "organ | Definition, meaning & more". www.collinsdictionary.com. Collins Dictionary.
    Retrieved 17 September 2016.
 3. ^ "Cardiovascular System". U.S. National Cancer Institute. Archived from the originalon
    2 February 2007. Retrieved 16 September 2008.
 4. ^ Human Biology and Health. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall. 2013. .
 5. ^ "The Cardiovascular System". State University of New York Downstate Medical Center.
    8 March 2018.




1.2.10: Learning outcome 10: Demonstrate knowledge of the endocrine
system and its functions
1.2.10.1: Introduction to learning outcome
This learning outcome specifies the competencies required to identify components of the
endocrine system as well as hormones and describe their functions.

1.2.10.2: Performance standards.
Components of endocrine system are identified
Hormones and their functions are described




                                                                                           xcv
  1.2.10.3: Information Sheet

The endocrine system is a network of glands and organs located throughout the body. It’s similar
to the nervous system in that it plays a vital role in controlling and regulating many of the body’s
functions.

However, while the nervous system uses nerve impulses and neurotransmitters for
communication, the endocrine system uses chemical messengers called hormones.

   Endocrine System Function
The endocrine system is responsible for regulating a range of bodily functions through the
release of hormones.
Hormones are secreted by the glands of the endocrine system, traveling through the bloodstream
to various organs and tissues in the body. The hormones then tell these organs and tissues what
to do or how to function.
Some examples of bodily functions that are controlled by the endocrine system include:
      metabolism
      growth and development
      sexual function and reproduction

      heart rate

      blood pressure

      appetite

      sleeping and waking cycles

      body temperature

  Endocrine System Organs
The endocrine system is made up of a complex network of glands, which are organs that secrete
substances.
The glands of the endocrine system are where hormones are produced, stored, and released. Each
gland produces one or more hormones, which go on to target specific organs and tissues in the
body.
The glands of the endocrine system include:

Hypothalamus. While some people don’t consider it a gland, the hypothalamus produces
multiple hormones that control the pituitary gland. It’s also involved in regulating many


                                                                                                xcvi
functions, including sleep-wake cycles, body temperature, and appetite. It can also regulate the
function of other endocrine glands.
Pituitary. The pituitary gland is located below the hypothalamus. The hormones it produces
affect growth and reproduction. They can also control the function of other endocrine glands.
Pineal. This gland is found in the middle of your brain. It’s important for your sleep-wake
cycles.
Thyroid. The thyroid gland is located in the front part of your neck. It’s very important for
metabolism.
Parathyroid. Also located in the front of your neck, the parathyroid gland is important for
maintaining control of calcium levels in your bones and blood.
Thymus. Located in the upper torso, the thymus is active until puberty and produces hormones
important for the development of a type of white blood cell called a T cell.
Adrenal. One adrenal gland can be found on top of each kidney. These glands produce
hormones important for regulating functions such as blood pressure, heart rate, and stress
response.
Pancreas. The pancreas is located in your abdomen behind your stomach. Its endocrine function
involves controlling blood sugar levels.

 Some endocrine glands also have non-endocrine functions. For example, the ovaries and testes
 produce hormones, but they also have the non-endocrine function of producing eggs and sperm,
 respectively.
 Endocrine System hormones
Hormones are the chemicals the endocrine system uses to send messages to organs and tissue
throughout the body. Once released into the bloodstream, they travel to their target organ or
tissue, which has receptors that recognize and react to the hormone.

Below are some examples of hormones that are produced by the endocrine system.




   Hormone                          Secreting         Function
                                    gland(s)
   adrenaline                       adrenal           increases blood pressure, heart rate, and
                                                      metabolism in reaction to stress
   aldosterone                      adrenal           controls the body’s salt and water balance
   cortisol                         adrenal           plays a role in stress response
   dehydroepiandrosterone           adrenal           aids in production of body odor and
   sulfate (DHEA)                                     growth of body hair during puberty

                                                                                                xcvii
   estrogen                         ovary             works to regulate menstrual cycle,
                                                      maintain pregnancy, and develop female
                                                      sex characteristics; aids in sperm
                                                      production
   follicle        stimulating      pituitary         controls the production of eggs and sperm
   hormone (FSH)
   glucagon                         pancreas          helps to increase levels of blood glucose
   insulin                          pancreas          helps to reduce your blood glucose levels
   luteinizing hormone (LH)         pituitary         controls estrogen and testosterone
                                                      production as well as ovulation
   melatonin                        pituitary         controls sleep and wake cycles
   oxytocin                         pituitary         helps with lactation, childbirth, and
                                                      mother-child bonding
   parathyroid hormone              parathyroid       controls calcium levels in bones and blood
   progesterone                     ovary             helps to prepare the body for pregnancy
                                                      when an egg is fertilized
   prolactin                        pituitary         promotes breast-milk production
   testosterone                     ovary, teste,     contributes to sex drive and body density
                                    adrenal           in males and females as well as
                                                      development of male sex characteristics
   thyroid hormone                  thyroid           help to control several body functions,
                                                      including the rate of metabolism and
                                                      energy levels
  Table 5: hormones produced by endocrine system

  1.2.10.4: Self Assessment
  a). Highlight glands in the endocrine system
  b). State bodily functions that are controlled by the endocrine system
  c).Describe endocrine system hormones

  1.2.10.4.1: Responses
  a). Highlight glands in the endocrine system
Hypothalamus. While some people don’t consider it a gland, the hypothalamus produces
multiple hormones that control the pituitary gland. It’s also involved in regulating many
functions, including sleep-wake cycles, body temperature, and appetite. It can also regulate the
function of other endocrine glands.
Pituitary. The pituitary gland is located below the hypothalamus. The hormones it produces
affect growth and reproduction. They can also control the function of other endocrine glands.
Pineal. This gland is found in the middle of your brain. It’s important for your sleep-wake
cycles.
Thyroid. The thyroid gland is located in the front part of your neck. It’s very important for
metabolism.

                                                                                              xcviii
Parathyroid. Also located in the front of your neck, the parathyroid gland is important for
maintaining control of calcium levels in your bones and blood.
Thymus. Located in the upper torso, the thymus is active until puberty and produces hormones
important for the development of a type of white blood cell called a T cell.
Adrenal. One adrenal gland can be found on top of each kidney. These glands produce
hormones important for regulating functions such as blood pressure, heart rate, and stress
response.
Pancreas. The pancreas is located in your abdomen behind your stomach. Its endocrine function
involves controlling blood sugar levels.


  b). State bodily functions that are controlled by the endocrine system
      metabolism
      growth and development
      sexual function and reproduction

      heart rate

      blood pressure

      appetite

      sleeping and waking cycles

      body temperature
  c).Describe endocrine system hormones
Hormones are the chemicals the endocrine system uses to send messages to organs and tissue
throughout the body. Once released into the bloodstream, they travel to their target organ or
tissue, which has receptors that recognize and react to the hormone.

  1.2.10.5: References
    1. Endocrine Physiology (4 ed.). McGraw Hill.
    2. ^ Quesada, Ivan (2008). "Physiology of the pancreatic α-cell and glucagon secretion: role
        in glucose homeostasis and diabetes". Journal of Endocrinology. 199 (1): 5–
        19. doi:10.1677/JOE-08-0290. PMID 18669612.
    3. ^ "How Does The Pancreas Work?". Informed Health.
    4. ^ Patel, H.; Jessu, R.; Tiwari, V. (2020). "Physiology, Posterior Pituitary". NCBI.
        StatPearls. PMID 30252386.
    5. ^ Neave N (2008). Hormones and behaviour: a psychological approach. Cambridge:
        Cambridge Univ. Press. ISBN 978-0-521-69201-4. Lay summary – Project Muse.
    6. ^ "Hormones". MedlinePlus. U.S. National Library of Medicine.


                                                                                                xcix
  1.2.11: Learning outcome 11: Demonstrate knowledge of the nervous system
  and its function

  1.2.11.1: Introduction to the learning outcome
  This learning outcome specifies the competencies required to outline the structure and function
  of a neuron, describe types of neurons, divisions of the nervous system and their components as
  well as outline nervous reflexes.

  1.2.11.2: Performance Standard
1.12 Structure and function of a neuron is outlined
1.13 Types of neurons are described
1.14 Divisions of the nervous system and their components are described
1.15 Nervous reflexes are outlined

  1.2.11.3: Information Sheet
  Functions of the Nervous System
  1. Gathers information from both inside and outside the body - Sensory Function
  2. Transmits information to the processing areas of the brain and spine
  3. Processes the information in the brain and spine – Integration Function
  4. Sends information to the muscles, glands, and organs so they can respond appropriately –
  Motor Function
  It controls and coordinates all essential functions of the body including all other body systems
  allowing the body to maintain homeostasis or its delicate balance.
  The Nervous System is divided into Two Main Divisions: Central Nervous System (CNS) and
  the Peripheral Nervous System (PNS).

  Divisions of the Nervous system




                                                                                                 c
Figure 15

Basic Cells of the Nervous System
Neuron
• Basic functional cell of nervous system
• Transmits impulses (up to 250 mph)




Figure 16

Parts of a Neuron
• Dendrite – receive stimulus and carries it impulses
toward the cell body
• Cell Body with nucleus – nucleus & most of
cytoplasm
                                                        ci
• Axon – fiber which carries impulses away from cell body
• Schwann Cells- cells which produce myelin or fat layer in the Peripheral Nervous System
• Myelin sheath – dense lipid layer which insulates the axon – makes the axon look gray
• Node of Ranvier – gaps or nodes in the myelin sheath
• Impulses travel from dendrite to cell body to axon

Three types of Neurons
    Sensory neurons – bring messages to CNS
    Motor neurons - carry messages from CNS
    Interneurons – between sensory & motor neurons in the CNS

Impulses
• A stimulus is a change in the environment with sufficient strength to initiate a response.
• Excitability is the ability of a neuron to respond to the stimulus and convert it into a nerve
impulse
• All of Nothing Rule – The stimulus is either strong enough to start and impulse or nothing
happens
• Impulses are always the same strength along a given neuron and they are self-propagation
– once it starts it continues to the end of the neuron in only one direction- from dendrite to cell
body to axon
• The nerve impulse causes a movement of ions across the cell membrane of the nerve cell.

Synapse
Synapse - small gap or space between the axon of one neuron and the dendrite of another - the
neurons do not actually tough at the synapse.
It is junction between neurons which uses neurotransmitters to start the impulse in the second
neuron or an effector (muscle or gland).
The synapse insures one-way transmission of impulses.

Neurotransmitters
Neurotransmitters – Chemicals in the junction which allow impulses to be started in the second
neuron.

Reflex Arc




                                                                                                cii
Figure 17: Components of a Reflex Arc
A. Receptor - reacts to a stimulus
B. Afferent pathway (sensory neuron) - conducts impulses to the CNS
C. Interneuron - consists of one or more synapses in the CNS (most are in the spine)
D. Efferent pathway (motor neuron) conducts impulses from CNS to effector.
E. Effector - muscle fibers (as in the Hamstring muscle) or glands responds by contracting or
secreting a product.
Spinal reflexes - initiated and completed at the spinal cord level. Occur without the involvement
of higher brain centers.

Central Nervous System
• Brain
    Brain stem – medulla, pons, midbrain
    Diencephalon – thalamus & hypothalamus
    Cerebellem
    Cerebrum

• Spine
    Spinal Cord




Meninges
Meninges are the three coverings around the brain & spine and help cushion, protect, and nourish
the brain and spinal cord.
• Dura mater is the most outer layer, very tough
• Arachnoid mater is the middle layer and adheres to the dura mater and has weblike attachments
to the innermost layer, the pia mater
• Pia mater is very thin, transparent, but tough, and covers the entire brain, following it into all
its crevices (sulci) and spinal cord
                                                                                                 ciii
• cerebrospinal fluid, which buffers, nourishes, and detoxifies the brain and spinal cord, flows
through the subarachnoid space, between the arachnoid mater and the pia mater.


Regions of the Brain
Cerebellum – coordination of movement and aspects of motor learning
Cerebrum – conscious activity including perception, emotion, thought, and planning
Thalamus – Brain’s switchboard – filters and then relays information to various brain regions
Medulla – vital reflexes as heart beat and respiration
Brainstem – medulla, pons, and midbrain (involuntary responses) and relays information from
spine to upper brain
Hypothalamus– involved in regulating activities internal organs, monitoring information from
the autonomic nervous system, controlling the pituitary gland and its hormones, and regulating
sleep and appetite.




Figure 18: The brain

Cerebrum
• Is the largest portion of the brain encompasses about two-thirds of the brain mass -
• It consists of two hemispheres divided by a fissure – corpus callosum
• It includes the cerebral cortex, the medullary body, and basal ganglia

• cerebral cortex is the layer of the brain often referred to as gray matter because it has cell
bodies and synapses but no myelin
    The cortex (thin layer of tissue) is gray because nerves in this area lack the insulation or white
     fatty myelin sheath that makes most other parts of the brain appear to be white.
    The cortex covers the outer portion (1.5mm to 5mm) of the cerebrum and cerebellum
    The cortex consists of folded bulges called gyri that create deep furrows or fissures called sulci
    The folds in the brain add to its surface area which increases the amount of gray matter and the
     quantity of information that can be processed.

Medullary body – is the white matter of the cerebrum and consists of myelinated axons
    Commisural fibers – conduct impulses between the hemispheres and for corpus callosum
                                                                                                     civ
    Projection fibers – conduct impulse in and out of the cerebral hemispheres
    Association fibers – conduct impulses within the hemispheres.

Basal ganglia – masses of gray matter in each hemisphere which are involved in the control of
voluntary muscle movements


Lobes of the Cerebrum
• Frontal – motor area involved in movement and in planning & coordinating behavior
• Parietal – sensory processing, attention, and language
• Temporal – auditory perception, speech, and complex visual perceptions
• Occipital – visual center – plays a role in processing visual information.

Special regions
• Broca’s area – located in the frontal lobe – important in the production of speech
• Wernicke’s area – comprehension of language and the production of meaningful speech
• Limbic System – a group of brain structures (amygdala, hippocampus, septum, basal ganglia,
and others) that help regulate the expression of emotions and emotional memory.

Peripheral Nervous System
Cranial nerves
• 12 pair
• Attached to undersurface of brain
Spinal nerves
• 31 pair
• Attached to spinal cord

Somatic Nervous System (voluntary)
• Relays information from skin, sense organs & skeletal muscles to CNS
• Brings responses back to skeletal muscles for voluntary responses.

Autonomic Nervous System (involuntary)
• Regulates bodies involuntary responses
• Relays information to internal organs
Two divisions
o Sympathetic nervous system – in times of stress
    Emergency response
    Fight or flight
o Parasympathetic nervous system – when body is at rest or with normal functions
    Normal everyday conditions.




                                                                                           cv
Figure 19: Autonomic nervous sytem

1.2.11.4: Self Assessment
a). Highlight the parts of a neuron.
b). Highlight regions of the brain.
c). Describe meninges

1.2.11.4.1: Responses
a). Highlight the parts of a neuron.
• Dendrite – receive stimulus and carries it impulses
toward the cell body
• Cell Body with nucleus – nucleus & most of cytoplasm
• Axon – fiber which carries impulses away from cell body
• Schwann Cells- cells which produce myelin or fat layer in the Peripheral Nervous System
• Myelin sheath – dense lipid layer which insulates the axon – makes the axon look gray
• Node of Ranvier – gaps or nodes in the myelin sheath

b). Highlight regions of the brain.
Cerebellum – coordination of movement and aspects of motor learning
Cerebrum – conscious activity including perception, emotion, thought, and planning
Thalamus – Brain’s switchboard – filters and then relays information to various brain regions
Medulla – vital reflexes as heart beat and respiration
Brainstem – medulla, pons, and midbrain (involuntary responses) and relays information from
spine to upper brain
Hypothalamus– involved in regulating activities internal organs, monitoring information from
the autonomic nervous system, controlling the pituitary gland and its hormones, and regulating
sleep and appetite.

                                                                                            cvi
c). Describe meninges
Meninges are the three coverings around the brain & spine and help cushion, protect, and nourish
the brain and spinal cord.
• Dura mater is the most outer layer, very tough
• Arachnoid mater is the middle layer and adheres to the dura mater and has weblike attachments
to the innermost layer, the pia mater
• Pia mater is very thin, transparent, but tough, and covers the entire brain, following it into all
its crevices (sulci) and spinal cord
• cerebrospinal fluid, which buffers, nourishes, and detoxifies the brain and spinal cord, flows
through the subarachnoid space, between the arachnoid mater and the pia mater.

1.2.11.5: References
  1. Kandel ER, Schwartz JH, Jessel TM, eds. (2000). "Ch. 4: The cytology of
      neurons". Principles of Neural Science. McGraw-Hill Professional. ISBN 978-0-8385-
      7701-1.
  2. ^ Jump up to: Allen NJ, Barres BA (2009). "Neuroscience: Glia – more than just brain
      glue".               Nature.               457               (7230):               675–
      677. Bibcode:2009Natur.457..675A. doi:10.1038/457675a. PMID 19194443. S2CID 205
      044137.
  3. ^ Azevedo FA, Carvalho LR, Grinberg LT, et al. (2009). "Equal numbers of neuronal and
      nonneuronal cells make the human brain an isometrically scaled-up primate brain". J.
      Comp.                 Neurol.                513                (5):               532–
      541. doi:10.1002/cne.21974. PMID 19226510. S2CID 5200449.
  4. ^ Jump up to:a b Kandel ER, Schwartz JH, Jessel TM, eds. (2000). "Ch. 17: The anatomical
      organization of the central nervous system". Principles of Neural Science. McGraw-Hill
      Professional. ISBN 978-0-8385-7701-1.
  5. ^ Standring, Susan (Editor-in-chief) (2005). Gray's Anatomy (39th ed.). Elsevier Churchill
      Livingstone. pp. 233–234. ISBN 978-0-443-07168-3.




1.2.12: Learning outcome 12: Demonstrate knowledge of the digestive system
and its function

1.2.12.1:Introduction to learning outcome
                                                                                                cvii
  This learning outcome specifies the competencies required to identify Components of digestive
  system, describe structure and functions of the components as well as describe the process of
  digestion.

  1.2.12.2: Performance standards
1.16 Components of digestive system are identified
1.17 Structure and functions of components are described
1.18 Process of digestion is described

  1.2.12.3: Information sheet
  The human digestive system is the collective name used to describe the alimentary canal, some
  accessory organs, and a variety of digestive processes that take place at different levels in the
  canal to prepare food eaten in the diet for absorption.
  It has a general structure that is modified at different levels to provide for the processes occurring
  at each level.
  The complex of digestive processes gradually breaks down the foods eaten until they are in a
  form suitable for absorption.
  After absorption, nutrients are used to synthesize body constituents.
  They provide the raw materials for the manufacture of new cells, hormones and enzymes, and
  the energy needed for these and other processes and for the disposal of waste materials.




                                                                                                    cviii
Figure: The digestive system

The alimentary canal begins at the mouth, passes through the thorax, abdomen, and pelvis and
ends at the anus. It is thus a long tube through which food passes. It has various parts that are
structurally remarkably similar. The parts include:

Mouth
Pharynx
Oesophagus
Stomach
Small intestine
Large intestine
Rectum and Anal canal.




Mouth
The mouth or oral cavity is bounded by muscles and bones: interiorly —by the lips, posteriorly
— it is continuous with the oropharynx, laterally —by the muscles of the cheeks, superiorly —
by the bony hard palate and muscular soft palate, inferiorly —by the muscular tongue and the
soft tissues of the floor of the mouth.
                                                                                              cix
  It is lined throughout with mucous membrane, consisting of stratified squamous epithelium
  containing small mucus-secreting glands.
  The palate forms the roof of the mouth and is divided into the anterior hard palate and the
  posterior soft palate. The soft palate is muscular, curves downwards from the posterior end of
  the hard palate, and blends with the walls of the pharynx at the sides.
  The uvula is a curved fold of muscle covered with mucous membrane, hanging down from the
  middle of the free border of the soft palate.
  It consists of the following important parts:

      The Tongue
  The tongue is a voluntary muscular structure that occupies the floor of the mouth.
  It is attached by its base to the hyoid bone and by a fold of its mucous membrane covering,
  called the frenulum, to the floor of the mouth.
  The superior surface consists of stratified squamous epithelium, with numerous papillae (little
  projections), containing nerve endings of the sense of taste, sometimes called the taste buds.
  The tongue plays an important part in:
    mastication (chewing)
    deglutition (swallowing)
    speech
    taste

     The Teeth
     The teeth are embedded in the alveoli or sockets of the alveolar ridges of the mandible and
      the maxilla.
   Each individual has two sets, the temporary or deciduous teeth, and the permanent teeth.
   At birth, the teeth of both dentitions are present in an immature form in the mandible and
      maxilla.
   There are 20 temporary teeth, 10 in each jaw. They begin to erupt when the child is about 6
      months old, and should all be present after 24 months.
   The permanent teeth begin to replace the deciduous teeth in the 6th year of age and this
      dentition, consisting of 32 teeth, is usually complete by the 24th year.
     Types and Functions of the teeth
The incisor and canine teeth are the cutting teeth and are used for biting off pieces of food,
whereas the premolar and molar teeth, with broad, flat surfaces, are used for grinding or chewing
food.

  The Pharynx

    Food passes from the oral cavity into the pharynx then to the esophagus below, with which
     it is continuous.
    The pharynx is divided for descriptive purposes into three parts, the nasopharynx,
     oropharynx, and laryngopharynx.
    The nasopharynx is important in respiration. The oropharynx and laryngopharynx are
     passages common to both the respiratory and the digestive systems.

                                                                                               cx
 Function of Pharynx
 The pharynx has roles in both the respiratory and digestive systems and can be thought of as the
 point where these systems diverge.
 For the digestive system, its muscular walls function in the process of swallowing, and it serves
 as a pathway for the movement of food from the mouth to the esophagus.
 The constrictive circular muscles of the pharynx’s outer layer play a big role in peristalsis. A
    series of contractions will help propel ingested food and drink down the intestinal tract safely.
 The inner layer’s longitudinal muscles, on the other hand, will widen the pharynx laterally
    and lift it upward, thus allowing the swallowing of ingested food and drink.

 The Oesophagus
  The esophagus is about 25 cm long and about 2 cm in diameter and lies in the median plane
   in the thorax in front of the vertebral column behind the trachea and the heart.
 It is continuous with the pharynx above and just below the diaphragm it joins the stomach.
 The upper and lower ends of the esophagus are closed by sphincter muscles.
 The upper cricopharyngeal sphincter prevents air from passing into the esophagus during
   inspiration and the aspiration of oesophageal contents.
 The cardiac or lower oesophageal sphincter prevents the reflux of acid gastric contents into
   the esophagus.

 Functions of Oesophagus
 The esophagus serves to pass food and liquids from the mouth down to the stomach. This is
   accomplished by periodic contractions (peristalsis).
 The esophagus is an important connection to the digestive system through the thoracic cavity,
   which protects the heart and lungs.
 Two sphincters on either side of the esophagus separate food into small units known as
   a bolus.

The Stomach
   The stomach is a J-shaped dilated portion of the alimentary tract situated in the epigastric,
    umbilical, and left hypochondriac regions of the abdominal cavity.
   The stomach is continuous with the esophagus at the cardiac sphincter and with the
    duodenum at the pyloric sphincter.
   It has two curvatures. The lesser curvature is short, lies on the posterior surface of the
    stomach, and is the downwards continuation of the posterior wall of the esophagus. Just
    before the pyloric sphincter, it curves upwards to complete the J shape.
   Where the esophagus joins the stomach the anterior region angles acutely upwards, curves
    downwards forming the greater curvature then slightly upwards towards the pyloric
    sphincter.
   The stomach is divided into three regions: the fundus, the body, and the antrum.
   At the distal end of the pyloric antrum is the pyloric sphincter, guarding the opening between
    the stomach and the duodenum.
   Stomach size varies with the volume of food it contains, which may be 1.5 liters or more in
    an adult.


                                                                                                  cxi
   In the stomach, gastric muscle contraction consists of a churning movement that breaks down
    the bolus and mixes it with gastric juice and peristaltic waves that propel the stomach contents
    towards the pylorus.
   About 2 liters of gastric juice are secreted daily by special secretory glands in the mucosa.
   It consists of Water, mineral salts, mucus secreted by goblet cells in the glands and on the
    stomach surface, hydrochloric acid, Intrinsic factor, inactive enzyme precursors, etc.




Figure 21: The stomach

 Functions of the Stomach
  Temporary storage allowing time for the digestive enzymes, pepsins, to act.
  Chemical digestion — pepsins convert proteins to polypeptides.
  Mechanical breakdown — the three smooth muscle layers enable the stomach to act as a
   churn, gastric juice is added and the contents are liquefied to chime.
 Performs limited absorption of water, alcohol and some lipid-soluble drugs
 Non-specific defense against microbes — provided by hydrochloric acid in gastric juice.
 Preparation of iron for absorption further along the track — the acid environment of the
   stomach solubilizes iron salts, which is required before iron can be absorbed
 Production of intrinsic factor needed for absorption of vitamin B12 in the terminal ileum
 Regulation of the passage of gastric contents into the duodenum. When the chyme is
   sufficiently acidified and liquefied, the pyloric antrum forces small jets of gastric contents
   through the pyloric sphincter into the duodenum.

 The Small Intestine
 The small intestine is continuous with the stomach at the pyloric sphincter and leads into the
   large intestine at the ileocaecal valve.
 It is a little over 5 meters long and lies in the abdominal cavity surrounded by the large
   intestine.
 In the small intestine, the chemical digestion of food is completed and most of the absorption
   of nutrients takes place.
 The small intestine comprises three main sections continuous with each other:

1. The duodenum: It is about 25 cm long and curves around the head of the pancreas.
   Secretions from the gall bladder and pancreas are released into the duodenum through a

                                                                                                cxii
   common structure, the hepatopancreatic ampulla, and the opening into the duodenum is
   guarded by the hepatopancreatic sphincter (of Oddi).
2. The jejunum: It is the middle section of the small intestine and is about 2 meters long.
3. The ileum, or terminal section, is about 3 meters long and ends at the ileocaecal valve, which
   controls the flow of material from the ileum to the caecum, the first part of the large intestine,
   and prevents regurgitation.

   The surface area of the small intestine mucosa is greatly increased by permanent circular
    folds, villi, and microvilli.
   The villi are tiny finger-like projections of the mucosal layer into the intestinal lumen, about
    0.5 to 1 mm long.
   Their walls consist of columnar epithelial cells, or enterocytes, with tiny microvilli (1 μm
    long) on their free border.

 Functions of the small intestine
  The small intestine is the part of the intestines where 90% of the digestion and absorption of
   food occurs, the other 10% taking place in the stomach and large intestine.
 The main function of the small intestine is the absorption of nutrients and minerals from food.

 The Large Intestine
  It is about 1.5 meters long, beginning at the caecum in the right iliac fossa and terminating at
   the rectum and anal canal deep in the pelvis.
 Its lumen is larger than that of the small intestine. It forms an arch around the coiled-up small
   intestine.
 The colon is divided into the caecum, ascending colon, transverse colon, descending colon,
   sigmoid colon rectum, and anal canal.




                                                                                                 cxiii
Figure 22: The large Intestine

 The caecum
  This is the first part of the colon. It is a dilated region which has a blind end inferiorly and is
   continuous with the ascending colon superiorly.
 Just below the junction of the two, the ileocaecal valve opens from the ileum.
 The vermiform appendix is a fine tube, closed at one end, which leads from the caecum. It is
   usually about 13 cm long and has the same structure as the walls of the colon but contains
   more lymphoid tissue.
 The ascending colon
 This passes upwards from the caecum to the level of the liver where it curves acutely to the
   left at the hepatic flexure to become the transverse colon.
 The transverse colon
 This is a loop of the colon which extends across the abdominal cavity in front of the
   duodenum and the stomach to the area of the spleen where it forms the splenic flexure and
   curves acutely downwards to become the descending colon.
 The descending colon
 This passes down the left side of the abdominal cavity then curves towards the midline. After
   it enters the true pelvis it is known as the sigmoid colon.
 The sigmoid colon
 This part describes an S-shaped curve in the pelvis then continues downwards to become the
   rectum.

 The Rectum and the anal canal
  It is a slightly dilated section of the colon about 13 cm long. It leads from the sigmoid colon
   and terminates in the anal canal.
 The anal canal is a short passage about 3.8 cm long in the adult and leads from the rectum to
   the exterior.
 Two sphincter muscles control the anus; the internal sphincter, consisting of smooth muscle
   fibers, is under the control of the autonomic nervous system and the external sphincter,
   formed by skeletal muscle, is under voluntary control.




Figure 23: The rectum and the anal canal
                                                                                                  cxiv
    Functions of the large intestine, rectum and anal canal
Absorption
  The contents of the ileum which pass through the ileocaecal valve into the caecum are fluid,
    even though some water has been absorbed in the small intestine.
  In the large intestine absorption of water continues until the familiar semisolid consistency
    of feces is achieved.
  Mineral salts, vitamins, and some drugs are also absorbed into the blood capillaries from the
    large intestine.
Microbial activity
  The large intestine is heavily colonized by certain types of bacteria, which synthesize vitamin
    K and folic acid. They include Escherichia coli, Enterobacter aerogenes, Streptococcus
    faecalis, and Clostridium perfringens (welchii).

Defaecation
  Usually, the rectum is empty, but when a mass movement forces the contents of the sigmoid
    colon into the rectum the nerve endings in its walls are stimulated by a stretch.
  Defaecation involves involuntary contraction of the muscle of the rectum and relaxation of
    the internal anal sphincter.
  Contraction of the abdominal muscles and lowering of the diaphragm increases the intra-
    abdominal pressure (Valsalva’s maneuver) and so assists the process of defaecation.

 1.2.12.4: Self Assessment
 a). Highlight parts of the large intestine.
 b). Highlight functions of the stomach

  1.2.12.4.1: Responses
   a). Highlight parts of the large intestine
  The caecum
  This is the first part of the colon. It is a dilated region which has a blind end inferiorly and is
      continuous with the ascending colon superiorly.
  Just below the junction of the two, the ileocaecal valve opens from the ileum.
  The vermiform appendix is a fine tube, closed at one end, which leads from the caecum. It is
      usually about 13 cm long and has the same structure as the walls of the colon but contains
      more lymphoid tissue.
  The ascending colon
  This passes upwards from the caecum to the level of the liver where it curves acutely to the
      left at the hepatic flexure to become the transverse colon.
  The transverse colon
  This is a loop of the colon which extends across the abdominal cavity in front of the
      duodenum and the stomach to the area of the spleen where it forms the splenic flexure and
      curves acutely downwards to become the descending colon.
  The descending colon
  This passes down the left side of the abdominal cavity then curves towards the midline. After
      it enters the true pelvis it is known as the sigmoid colon.
                                                                                                  cxv
  The sigmoid colon
  This part describes an S-shaped curve in the pelvis then continues downwards to become the
    rectum.

  b). Highlight functions of the stomach
    Temporary storage allowing time for the digestive enzymes, pepsins, to act.
    Chemical digestion — pepsins convert proteins to polypeptides.
    Mechanical breakdown — the three smooth muscle layers enable the stomach to act as a
     churn, gastric juice is added and the contents are liquefied to chime.
  Performs limited absorption of water, alcohol and some lipid-soluble drugs
  Non-specific defense against microbes — provided by hydrochloric acid in gastric juice.
  Preparation of iron for absorption further along the track — the acid environment of the
     stomach solubilizes iron salts, which is required before iron can be absorbed
  Production of intrinsic factor needed for absorption of vitamin B12 in the terminal ileum
  Regulation of the passage of gastric contents into the duodenum. When the chyme is
     sufficiently acidified and liquefied, the pyloric antrum forces small jets of gastric contents
     through the pyloric sphincter into the duodenum.


  1.2.13: Learning outcome 13: Demonstrate knowledge of the urinary system
  and its function

  1.2.13.1: Introduction to learning outcome
  This learning outcome specifies the competencies required to identify Components of the
  urinary system, describe structure and functions of components and describe process of urine
  formation.

  1.2.13.2: Performance Standard
1.19 Components of urinary system are identified
1.20 Structure and functions of components are described
1.21 Process of urine formation is described




  1.2.13.3:Information Sheet
  Thousands of metabolic processes in myriad body cells produce hundreds of waste products.
  The urinary system removes them by filtering and cleansing the blood as it passes through the
  kidneys. Another vital function is the regulation of the volume, acidity, salinity, concentration,
  and chemical composition of blood, lymph, and other body fluids. Under hormonal control, the
  kidneys continually monitor what they release into the urine to maintain a healthy chemical
  balance.



                                                                                                cxvi
The urinary system is composed of a pair of kidneys, a pair of ureters, a bladder, and a urethra.
These components together carry out the urinary system’s function of regulating the volume and
composition of body fluids, removing waste products from the blood, and expelling the waste
and excess water from the body in the form of urine. The two kidneys are reddish organs
resembling beans in shape that are situated on either side of the abdomen just above the waist
and towards the back of the body. The kidneys contain microscopic filtering units that remove
waste, unwanted minerals, and excess water from the blood as urine. Each kidney is connected
to the bladder by a long tube called a ureter, which transports urine away.

The bladder is a hollow, muscular organ situated centrally in the pelvis; it stores urine until it is
convenient to release it. At a certain volume, stretch receptors in its wall transmit nervous
impulses that initiate a conscious desire to urinate. The urethra then conducts urine from the
bladder to the outside.




Figure 24: The urinary system

THE KIDNEYS
The kidneys sit at the back of the abdominal wall and at the start of the urinary system. These
organs are constantly at work:
    Nephrons, tiny structures in the renal pyramids, filter gallons of blood each day.
    The kidneys reabsorb vital substances, remove unwanted ones, and return the filtered blood
     back to the body.
    As if they weren’t busy enough, the kidneys also create urine to remove all the waste.


                                                                                                cxvii
Figure 25: The kidney

The kidneys are located behind the peritoneum, and so are called retroperitoneal organs. They
sit in the back of the abdomen between the levels of the T12 and L03 vertebrae. The right kidney
is slightly lower than the left kidney to accommodate the liver. Both kidneys are bean-shaped
and about the size of an adult fist.

Blood enters the kidneys through renal arteries. These arteries branch into tiny capillaries that
interact with urinary structures inside the kidneys (namely the nephrons). Here the blood is
filtered. Waste is removed and vital substances are reabsorbed back into the bloodstream. The
filtered blood leaves through the renal veins.

Each kidney contains over 1 million tiny structures called nephrons. The nephrons are located
partly in the cortex and partly inside the renal pyramids, where the nephron tubules make up
most of the pyramid mass. Nephrons perform the primary function of the kidneys: regulating
the concentration of water and other substances in the body. They filter the blood, reabsorb what
the body needs, and excrete the rest as urine.

The kidneys filter unwanted substances from the blood and produce urine to excrete them.
There are 3 main steps of urine formation:
    Glomerular filtration,
    Reabsorption
    Secretion.
These processes ensure that only waste and excess water are removed from the body.

Each nephron has a glomerulus, the site of blood filtration. The glomerulus is a network of
capillaries surrounded by a cuplike structure, the glomerular capsule (or Bowman’s capsule).
As blood flows through the glomerulus, blood pressure pushes water and solutes from the
capillaries into the capsule through a filtration membrane. This glomerular filtration begins the
urine formation process.
                                                                                            cxviii
Each kidney contains over 1 million tiny structures called nephrons. The nephrons are located
partly in the cortex and partly inside the renal pyramids, where the nephron tubules make up
most of the pyramid mass. Nephrons perform the primary function of the kidneys: regulating
the concentration of water and other substances in the body. They filter the blood, reabsorb what
the body needs, and excrete the rest as urine.

Each kidney contains over 1 million tiny structures called nephrons. The nephrons are located
partly in the cortex and partly inside the renal pyramids, where the nephron tubules make up
most of the pyramid mass. Nephrons perform the primary function of the kidneys: regulating
the concentration of water and other substances in the body. They filter the blood, reabsorb what
the body needs, and excrete the rest as urine.




Figure 26: Urine formation

The kidneys filter unwanted substances from the blood and produce urine to excrete them.
There are 3 main steps of urine formation:
    Glomerular filtration,
    Reabsorption
    Secretion.
These processes ensure that only waste and excess water are removed from the body.

Each nephron has a glomerulus, the site of blood filtration. The glomerulus is a network of
capillaries surrounded by a cuplike structure, the glomerular capsule (or Bowman’s capsule).
As blood flows through the glomerulus, blood pressure pushes water and solutes from the
capillaries into the capsule through a filtration membrane.
This glomerular filtration begins the urine formation process.




                                                                                             cxix
Figure                       27:                     Glomerular                        filtration
The nephrons of the kidneys process blood and create urine through a process of filtration,
reabsorption, and secretion. Urine is about 95% water and 5% waste products. Nitrogenous
wastes excreted in urine include urea, creatinine, ammonia, and uric acid. Ions such as sodium,
potassium, hydrogen, and calcium are also excreted.

Urine produced in the kidneys travels down the ureters into the urinary bladder. The bladder
expands like an elastic sac to hold more urine. As it reaches capacity, the process of micturition,
or urination, begins. Involuntary muscle movements send signals to the nervous system, putting
the decision to urinate under conscious control.

The internal urethral sphincter and the external urethral sphincter both provide muscle control
for the flow of urine. The internal sphincter is involuntary. It surrounds the opening of the
bladder to the urethra and relaxes to allow urine to pass. The external sphincter is voluntary. It
surrounds the urethra outside the bladder and must be relaxed for urination to occur.

Smooth muscle stretch initiates the micturition reflex by activating stretch receptors in the
bladder wall. This autonomic reflex causes the detrusor muscle to contract and the internal
urethral sphincter muscle to relax, allowing urine to flow into the urethra. The stretch receptors
also send a message to the thalamus and the cerebral cortex, giving voluntary control over the
external urethral sphincter. We usually gain this control of urination between the ages of 2 and
3, as our brains develop.

1.2.13.4: Self Assessment
a). State the steps involved in urine formation.
b). Describe the kidney
1.2.13.4.1: Responses
a). State the steps involved in urine formation
    Glomerular filtration,
    Reabsorption
    Secretion

b). Describe the kidney
                                                                                               cxx
  The kidneys are located behind the peritoneum, and so are called retroperitoneal organs. They
  sit in the back of the abdomen between the levels of the T12 and L03 vertebrae. The right kidney
  is slightly lower than the left kidney to accommodate the liver. Both kidneys are bean-shaped
  and about the size of an adult fist.

  Blood enters the kidneys through renal arteries. These arteries branch into tiny capillaries that
  interact with urinary structures inside the kidneys (namely the nephrons). Here the blood is
  filtered. Waste is removed and vital substances are reabsorbed back into the bloodstream. The
  filtered blood leaves through the renal veins.

  Each kidney contains over 1 million tiny structures called nephrons. The nephrons are located
  partly in the cortex and partly inside the renal pyramids, where the nephron tubules make up
  most of the pyramid mass. Nephrons perform the primary function of the kidneys: regulating
  the concentration of water and other substances in the body. They filter the blood, reabsorb what
  the body needs, and excrete the rest as urine.

  1.2.13.5:References
   1. "The Urinary Tract & How It Works | NIDDK". National Institute of Diabetes and
      Digestive and Kidney Diseases.
   2. ^ C. Dugdale, David (16 September 2011). "Female urinary tract". MedLine Plus Medical
      Encyclopedia.
   3. ^ Maton, Anthea; Jean Hopkins; Charles William McLaughlin; Susan Johnson; Maryanna
      Quon Warner; David LaHart; Jill D. Wright (1993). Human Biology and Health.
      Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, USA: Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-981176-1.
   4. ^ Caldwell HK, Young WS III, Lajtha A, Lim R (2006). "Oxytocin and Vasopressin:
      Genetics and Behavioral Implications" (PDF). Handbook of Neurochemistry and
      Molecular Neurobiology: Neuroactive Proteins and Peptides (3rd ed.). Berlin: Springer.
      pp. 573–607.

  1.2.14: Learning outcome 14: Demonstrate knowledge of the respiratory
  system and its function

  1.2.14.1: Introduction to learning outcome
  This learning outcome specifies the competencies required to identify Components of the
  respiratory system, describe the structure and function of components and describe the
  respiration process.

  1.2.14.2:Performance standard
1.22   Components of respiratory system are identified
1.23   Structure and functions of components are described
1.24   Respiration process is described


                                                                                               cxxi
1.2.14.3:Information sheet
In biology, respiration has two meanings: - at the cellular level, it refers to the chemical reactions
that take place in the mitochondria, which require oxygen, and are the principle source of energy
for eukaryotic cells; - at the level of the whole organism, it refers to the process of taking in
oxygen from the environment and giving carbon dioxide back to it.

Cells need oxygen to generate ATP in their mitochondria
• Of all organs, your liver has the greatest need: 81 litres of oxygen a day, while your brain
requires 76 litres.
• A top marathoner uses about 500 litres of oxygen in the course of a race.
• The main physiological difference between a sedentary person and a runner is the number of
mitochondria per cell, which increases with training.




Figure28: The respiratory system




                                                                                                 cxxii
Figure 29: The alveoli
A pair of human lungs has some 300 million alveoli, where gas exchange takes place, providing
a respiratory surface of about 70 square meters.

The human respiratory system
    Air enters through the nose or mouth and passes into the pharynx, past the larynx, and down
     the trachea, bronchi and bronchioles to the alveoli in the lungs.
    Gas exchange takes place in the alveoli. The barrier between the air in an alveolus and the blood
     in its capillaries is only 0.5 micrometer.
    Oxygen and carbon dioxide diffuse into and out of the bloodstream through the capillaries
     surrounding the walls of the alveoli.

The trachea, bronchi and bronchioles, which serve mainly to transport air by bulk flow,
are lined with epithelial cells.
• These include both mucus-secreting and ciliated cells.
• The mucus coats the epithelium of the respiratory system and traps foreign particles.
• The cilia beat continuously, pushing mucus and foreign particles toward the pharynx, to
be expelled.



Mechanics of respiration
• Air flows into or out of the lungs when the air pressure within the alveoli differs from the
pressure of the external air atmospheric pressure).
• The pressure in the lungs is varied by changes in the volume of the thoracic cavity, caused by
the contraction and relaxation of the diaphragm and of intercostal (“between the-
ribs”) muscles.


Transport and exchange of gases
• Oxygen is almost insoluble in blood plasma.
• The blood transports oxygen thanks to respiratory pigments which, in vertebrates, are called
hemoglobin. Each hemoglobin molecule can bind four molecules of oxygen.
• In the capillaries of the alveoli, where the partial pressure of oxygen is high, most of the
hemoglobin is combined with oxygen.
• In the tissues, where the partial pressure is lower, oxygen is released from the hemoglobin
molecules into the plasma and diffuses into the tissues.

Carbon dioxide is more soluble than oxygen and some of it is dissolved in the blood.
• However, most CO2 reacts with water to form carbonic acid, a weak acid that dissociates to
form bicarbonate (HCO3-) and hydrogen (H+) ions:
• CO2 + H2O H2CO3 HCO3 + H+
Carbon Water Carbonic Bicarbonate Hydrogen
dioxide acid ion ion

                                                                                                 cxxiii
• The reaction can go in either direction, depending on the partial pressure of carbon dioxide in
the blood.



Control of Respiration
• The rate and depth of respiration are controlled by respiratory neurons in the brainstem which
activate motor neurons in the spinal cord that cause the diaphragm and intercostal muscles to
contract.
• In addition, chemoreceptor cells, located in the carotid arteries, signal the respiratory neurons
when the concentration of oxygen decreases.
• Centres in the brain and chemoreceptors simultaneously monitor the concentration of dissolved
carbon dioxide and hydrogen.
• The system is highly sensitive to the slightest changes in the chemical composition of the blood
(particularly hydrogen ion, which reflects the concentration of carbon dioxide).

1.2.14.4: Self Assessment
a). Describe the mechanics of respiration
b). Describe the movement of air from the atmosphere to the alveoli.

1.2.14.4.1: Responses
a). Describe the mechanics of respiration
• Air flows into or out of the lungs when the air pressure within the alveoli differs from the
pressure of the external air atmospheric pressure).
• The pressure in the lungs is varied by changes in the volume of the thoracic cavity, caused by
the contraction and relaxation of the diaphragm and of intercostal (“between the-
ribs”) muscles
b). Describe the movement of air from the atmosphere to the alveoli.
    Air enters through the nose or mouth and passes into the pharynx, past the larynx, and down
     the trachea, bronchi and bronchioles to the alveoli in the lungs.
    Gas exchange takes place in the alveoli. The barrier between the air in an alveolus and the blood
     in its capillaries is only 0.5 micrometer.
    Oxygen and carbon dioxide diffuse into and out of the bloodstream through the capillaries
     surrounding the walls of the alveoli.


1.2.14.5: References
  1. Maton, Anthea; Hopkins, Jean Susan; Johnson, Charles William; McLaughlin, Maryanna
     Quon; Warner, David; LaHart Wright, Jill (2010). Human Biology and Health. Englewood
     Cliffs: Prentice Hall. pp. 108–118. ISBN 978-0134234359.
  2. ^ Jump up to:a b c Williams, Peter L.; Warwick, Roger; Dyson, Mary; Bannister, Lawrence
     H. (1989). Gray's Anatomy (Thirty-seventh ed.). Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone.
     pp. 1278–1282. ISBN 0443-041776.

                                                                                                 cxxiv
    3. ^ Lovelock, James (1991). Healing Gaia: Practical medicine for the Planet. New York:
       Harmony Books. pp. 21–34, 73–88. ISBN 0-517-57848-4.
    4. ^ Shu, BC; Chang, YY; Lee, FY; Tzeng, DS; Lin, HY; Lung, FW (2007-10-31). "Parental
       attachment, premorbid personality, and mental health in young males with
       hyperventilation     syndrome".      Psychiatry    Research.      153     (2):    163–
       70. doi:10.1016/j.psychres.2006.05.006. PMID 17659783. S2CID 3931401.
    5. ^ Henry RP, Swenson ER (June 2000). "The distribution and physiological significance of
       carbonic anhydrase in vertebrate gas exchange organs". Respiration Physiology. 121




  1.2.15:Learning outcome 15: Demonstrate knowledge of the special senses
  and their functions

  1.2.15.1:Introduction to learning outcome
  This learning outcome specifies the competencies required to identify Sensory organs are
  identified, outline structures of special organs and describe their functions.

  1.2.15.2:Performance standard
1.25 Sensory organs are identified
1.26 Structures of special organs are outlined
1.27 Functions of special organs are described

  1.2.15.3:Information sheet
  Sense organs
  Sensory Receptors - receive input, generate receptor potentials and with enough summation,
  generate action potentials in the neurons they are part of or synapse with

  5 Types of Sensory Receptors - based on the type of stimuli they detect:
  1. Mechanoreceptors - pressure receptors, stretch receptors, and specialized mechanoreceptors
  involved in movement and balance.
  2. Thermoreceptors - skin and viscera, respond to both external and internal temperature
  3. Pain receptors - stimulated by lack of O2, chemicals released from damaged cells and
  inflammatory cells
  4. Chemoreceptors - detect changes in levels of O2, CO2, and H+ ions (pH) as well as
  chemicals that stimulate taste and smell receptors
                                                                                           cxxv
5. Photoreceptors - stimulated by light

Distribution of Receptors in the body:
Special Senses
• mediated by relatively complex sense organs of the head, innervated by cranial nerves
• vision, hearing, equilibrium, taste and smell
General (somesthetic, somatosensory)
• receptors widely distributed in skin, muscles, tendons, joints, and viscera
• they detect touch, pressure, stretch, heat, cold and pain, blood pressure

Special Senses
Sensation and perception
• Vision – Eye
• Hearing – Ear
• Equilibrium – Ear
• Taste – Taste receptors
• Smell – Olfactory system

General Senses
• Skin – Hot, cold, pressure, pain
• Muscles, joints, and tendons – proprioceptors- stretch receptors respond to stretch or
compression
• Pain Receptors – somatic or visceral

Eye - Vision
Processes
• Light energy is transduced into neural activity
• Neural activity is processed by the brain
• Note: For an analogy, you can imagine taking a picture with a camera. The eye is the camera,
the retina, which is a specialized part of the brain at the back of the eye, is the film, and the parts
of the brain that process visual information is the photoshop.

Human visual systems permit light reflected off distant objects to be:
• Localized relative to the individual within his or her environment
• Identified based on size, shape, color, and past experience
• Perceived to be moving (or not)
• Detected in a wide variety of lighting conditions

Sequence of events
• Light entering the eye is focused on the retina
• Retina converts light energy into neuronal activity
• Axons of the retinal neurons are bundled to form the optic nerves
• Visual information is distributed to several brain structures that perform different functions.

Eye – the organ used to sense light
Three layers –
                                                                                                  cxxvi
1. Outer layer consists of sclera and cornea
2. Middle layer consists of choroid, ciliary body and iris
3. Inner layer consists of retina




Figure 30: The eye

Extraocular muscles--attached to the eye and skull and allow movement

Anatomy of the Eye
Gross anatomy
Functions of the major parts of the eye:
• Sclera or Scleroid Layer – (white of eye) the outermost layer that forms the eyeball- a tough
protective layer of connective tissue that helps maintain the shape of the eye and provides an
attachment for the muscles that move the eye
• Conjunctiva--membrane inside the eyelid attached to the sclera
• Cornea - the transparent surface covering the iris and pupil- a clear, dome-shaped part of the
sclera covering the front of the eye through which light enters the eye
• Anterior Chamber – a small chamber between the cornea and the pupil
• Aqueous Humor - fluid behind the cornea - the clear fluid that fills that anterior chamber of
the eye and helps to maintain the shape of the cornea providing most of the nutrients for the lens
and the cornea and involved in waste management in the front of the eye
• Choroid Layer - middle layer of the eye containing may blood vessels
• Ciliary Body - the ciliary body is a circular band of muscle that is connected and sits
immediately behind the iris- produces aqueous humor, changes shape of lens for focusing, and
• Iris - circular muscle that controls the diameter of the pupil - the pigmented front portion of
the choroid layer and contains the blood vessels - it determines the eye color and it controls the
amount of light that enters the eye by changing the size of the pupil (an albino only has the blood
vessels – not pigment so it appears red or pink because of the blood vessels)
• Lens - a crystalline structure located just behind the iris - it focuses light onto the retina

                                                                                             cxxvii
• Pupil - the opening in the center of the iris- it changes size as the amount of light changes (the
more light, the smaller the hole) and it allows light to reach the retina
• Vitreous - a thick, transparent liquid that fills the center of the eye - it is mostly water and
gives the eye its form and shape (also called the vitreous humor)
• Retina - axons of the retina leaving the eye - sensory tissue that lines the back of the eye. It
contains millions of photoreceptors (rods for black & white and cones for color ) that convert
light rays into electrical impulses that are relayed to the brain via the optic nerve
• Optic nerve - the nerve that transmits electrical impulses from the retina to the brain

Opthalmoscopic appearance (Retina as seen through the pupil)
• Note: in photographs, the red appearance of the eye is actually the retina photographed. Double
flash camera causes the pupil to constrict.
• Optic disk (blind spot)--no vision is possible
o Blood vessels originate here. The vessels
shadow the retina
o Optic nerve fibers exit here
o No photoreceptors
• Macula--area of the retina responsible for central vision (vs. peripheral)
• Fovea--center of the retina (where most of the cones are)




Figure 31: The eye


                                                                                              cxxviii
Common eye defects include
• Myopia or nearsightedness where the eyeball is too long or the cornea is too steep;
• Hyperopia or far sightedness where the eyeball is short or lens cannot become round enough:
• Presbyopia where the muscles controlling the bulging of the lens become weak as we age;
• Cataracts where the lens becomes fogged;
• Nyctalopia or night blindness where vision is impaired in dim light and in the dark due to
pigment rhodospin in the rods not functioning properly External features of the eye.

Cross sectional anatomy
• Lens--transparent surface that contributes to the formation of images (w/i 9 meters)
• Ciliary muscles--change the shape of the lens and allow focusing
• Vitreous humor--more viscous than the aqueous humor - Lies between the lens and the retina
and provides spherical shape
• Retina - inner most layer of cells at the back of the eye - Transduces light energy into neural
activity

EAR – HEARING
Outer Ear & ear canal – brings sound into eardrum
Eardrum – vibrates to amplify sound & separates inner and middle ear
Middle ear has 3 small bones or Ossicles = anvil, stirrup, stapes – amplify sound (small bones)
which vibrate sound.
Eustachian tube – connects middle ear to throat and equalizes pressure on eardrum
Cochlea – in inner ear – has receptors for sound & sends signals to brain via Auditory Nerve
Process of hearing:
• Sound waves enter your outer ear and travel through your ear canal to the middle ear.
• The ear canal channels the waves to your eardrum, a thin, sensitive membrane stretched tightly
over the entrance to your middle ear.
• The waves cause your eardrum to vibrate.
• It passes these vibrations on to the hammer, one of three tiny bones in your ear. The hammer
vibrating causes the anvil, the small bone touching the hammer, to vibrate. The anvil passes
these vibrations to the stirrup, another small bone which touches the anvil. From the stirrup, the
vibrations pass into the inner ear.
• The stirrup touches a liquid filled sack and the vibrations travel into the cochlea, which is
shaped like a shell.
• Inside the cochlea, a vestibular system formed by three semicircular canals that are
approximately at right angles to each other and which are responsible for the sense of balance
and spatial orientation.
It has chambers filled with a viscous fluid and small particles (otoliths) containing calcium
carbonate. The movement of these particles over small hair cells in the inner ear sends signals
to the brain that are interpreted as motion and acceleration. The brain processes the information
from the ear and lets us distinguish between different types of sounds.\




                                                                                             cxxix
Figure 32: The ear


Ear – Equilibrium
Equilibrium
• Equilibrium is a response to movements of the head - Example: a cat landing on its feet if
dropped from upside down
• Vestibular Apparatus: the equilibrium receptors of the inner ear
• Divided into static and dynamic equilibrium
Static Equilibrium
• When the body is not moving
• Maculae: receptors within the membrane sacs of the vestibule that report on the position of
the head with respect to the pull of gravity when the body is not moving.
• Each macula is a patch of receptor cells with their “hairs” embedded in the otolithic membrane
• Otolithic Membrane: a jelly-like substance containing otoliths
• Otoliths: tiny stones made of calcium salts that roll in response to changes in the pull of gravity.
When otoliths move, they pull on the gel and this bends the hairs. Activated hair cells send
impulses along the vestibular nerve
• Vestibular Nerve: (Cranial Nerve VIII) transmits
signals to the cerebellum
Dynamic Equilibrium
• Receptors in the semicircular canals respond to angular or rotary movements of the head.
• Semicircular canals are oriented in the three planes of space
• Crista Ampullaris: receptor region that consists of a tuft of hair cells covered with a gelatinous
cap called the cupula
• When the head moves in an angular direction:
o The endomlymph lags behind
o As the cupula drags against the stationaryendolymph, the cupula bends
o This stimulates hair cells to transmit signals to the vestibular nerve
• When you are moving at a constant rate, receptors stop sending impulses
• You no longer have the sensation of motion until you change speed or direction
                                                                                                 cxxx
Vision plays a significant role in balance. Approximately twenty percent of the nerve fibers from
the eyes interact with the vestibular system.

Taste and Smell – Chemical Receptors
Taste buds
• The mouth contains around 10,000 taste buds, most of which are located on and around the
tiny bumps on your tongue.
• Every taste bud detects five primary tastes:
o Sour
o Sweet
o Bitter
o Salty
o Umami - salts of certain acids (for example monosodium glutamate or MSG)
• Each of your taste buds contains 50-100 specialised receptor cells.
• Sticking out of every single one of these receptor cells is a tiny taste hair that checks out the
food chemicals in your saliva.
• When these taste hairs are stimulated, they send nerve impulses to your brain.
• Each taste hair responds best to one of the five basic tastes.
Smell Receptors or Olfactory receptors
• Humans able to detect thousands of different smells
• Olfactory receptors occupy a stamp-sized area in the roof of the nasal cavity, the hollow space
inside the nose
• Tiny hairs, made of nerve fibers, dangle from all your olfactory receptors. They are covered
with a layer of mucus.
• If a smell, formed by chemicals in the air, dissolves in this mucus, the hairs absorb it and excite
your olfactory receptors.
• A few molecules are enough to activate these extremely sensitive receptors.
• Olfactory Hairs easily fatigued so you do not notice smells
• Linked to memories - when your olfactory receptors are stimulated, they transmit impulses to
your brain and the pathway is directly connected to the limbic system - the part of your brain
that deals with emotions so you usually either like or dislike a smell
• Smells leave long-lasting impressions and are strongly linked to your memories
• Much of what we associate as taste also involves smell – that is why hot foods “taste”
different than “cold” foods.




                                                                                                cxxxi
Figure 33: Smell receptors

1.2.15.4: Self Assessment
a). Highlight five types of sensory receptors
b). Describe the process of hearing
c). Highlight five common eye defects

1.2.15.4.1: Responses
a). Highlight five types of sensory receptors
1. Mechanoreceptors - pressure receptors, stretch receptors, and specialized mechanoreceptors
involved in movement and balance.
2. Thermo receptors - skin and viscera, respond to both external and internal temperature
3. Pain receptors - stimulated by lack of O2, chemicals released from damaged cells and
inflammatory cells
4. Chemoreceptors - detect changes in levels of O2, CO2, and H+ ions (pH) as well as
chemicals that stimulate taste and smell receptors
5. Photoreceptors - stimulated by light

b). Describe the process of hearing
Sound waves enter your outer ear and travel through your ear canal to the middle ear.
• The ear canal channels the waves to your eardrum, a thin, sensitive membrane stretched tightly
over the entrance to your middle ear.
• The waves cause your eardrum to vibrate.
• It passes these vibrations on to the hammer, one of three tiny bones in your ear. The hammer
vibrating causes the anvil, the small bone touching the hammer, to vibrate. The anvil passes
these vibrations to the stirrup, another small bone which touches the anvil. From the stirrup, the
vibrations pass into the inner ear.
• The stirrup touches a liquid filled sack and the vibrations travel into the cochlea, which is
shaped like a shell.


                                                                                            cxxxii
  • Inside the cochlea, a vestibular system formed by three semicircular canals that are
  approximately at right angles to each other and which are responsible for the sense of balance
  and spatial orientation.
  It has chambers filled with a viscous fluid and small particles (otoliths) containing calcium
  carbonate. The movement of these particles over small hair cells in the inner ear sends signals
  to the brain that are interpreted as motion and acceleration. The brain processes the information
  from the ear and lets us distinguish between different types of sounds

  c). Highlight five common eye defects
  • Myopia or nearsightedness where the eyeball is too long or the cornea is too steep;
  • Hyperopia or far sightedness where the eyeball is short or lens cannot become round enough:
  • Presbyopia where the muscles controlling the bulging of the lens become weak as we age;
  • Cataracts where the lens becomes fogged;
  • Nyctalopia or night blindness where vision is impaired in dim light and in the dark due to
  pigment rhodospin in the rods not functioning properly External features of the eye.

  1.2.15.5: References
    1. Drake et al. (2010), Gray's Anatomy for Students, 2nd Ed., Churchill Livingstone.
    2. Carlson, Neil R. (2013). "6". Physiology of Behaviour (11th ed.). Upper Saddle River, New
        Jersey, USA: Pearson Education Inc. pp. 187–189. ISBN 978-0-205-23939-9.
    3. Margaret., Livingstone (2008). Vision and art : the biology of seeing. Hubel, David H. New
        York: Abrams. ISBN 9780810995543. OCLC 192082768.
    4. Schacter, Daniel L. et al.,["Psychology"],"Worth Publishers",2011
    5. Jan Schnupp; Israel Nelken; Andrew King (2011). Auditory Neuroscience. MIT
        Press. ISBN 978-0-262-11318-2. Archived from the origin


  1.2.16: Learning outcome 16: Demonstrate knowledge of the reproductive
  system and its functions

  1.2.16.1: Introduction to learning outcome
  This learning outcome specifies the competencies required to identify Components of the human
  reproductive system, describe the structure and components as well as the fertilization process.

  1.2.16.2: Performance standard
1.28 Components of the human reproductive system are identified
1.29 Structure and functions of components are described
1.30 Fertilization process is described

  1.2.16.3: Information sheet
  Function of the reproductive system
  Sexual reproduction requires a male and a female of the same species to copulate and combine
  their genes in order to produce a new individual who is genetically different from his parents.
  Sexual reproduction relies on meiosis to shuffle the genes , so that new combinations of genes
                                                                                             cxxxiii
occur in each generation , allowing some of the offspring of survive in the constantly – changing
environment . The male reproductive system produces, sustains, and delivers sperm cells
(spermatozoa) to the female reproductive tract. The female reproductive system produces,
sustains , and allows egg cells (oocytes ) to be fertilized by sperm . It also supports the
development of an offspring (gestation) and gives birth to a new individual (parturition) .



Male Reproductive System
    Testis: Sex organ that produces sperm in a process called spermatogenesis, and male sex
     hormones (testosterone).
    Developed in a male fetus near the kidneys, and descend to the scrotum about 2 months before
     birth.
    Each testis is enclosed by a layer of fibrous connective tissue called tunica alumina.
    Each testis contains about 250 functional units called lobules; each lobule contains about 4
     seminiferous tubules where spermatogenesis occurs.
    All somniferous tubules in a testis converge and form a channel called rate testis.




Testis




Figure 33: The Testis

 Scrotum: A pouch – like cutaneous extension that contains the two testes. Located outside of
pelvic cavity to prevent overheating of testes [internal temperature of scrotum is always about
3 ˚F below body temperature] .
Epididymis: An expanded tubule from the rate testis where sperm is stored (for about 3 days) ,
matured and become fully functional. Contains cilia on its columnar epithelium that help move
sperm toward vas deferens during ejaculation. .
                                                                                           cxxxiv
Vas deferens: A tubule (about 10 inches long) that connects epididymis to the urethra for
transporting sperm during ejaculation. It contains smooth muscle that undergoes rapid peristalsis
during ejaculation.

Accessory sex glands
 Seminal vesicles: secrete an alkaline solution that makes up 60% of the semen volume; this
seminal fluid contains fructose (nutrient for the sperm) and prostaglandins (substances that
stimulate uterine contraction during sexual excitation).
Prostate gland: secretes a slightly acidic, milky white fluid that makes up about 30% of semen
volume ; this fluid helps neutralize the pH of semen and vaginal secretion.
Bulb urethral gland: secretes a clear lubricating fluid that aids in sexual intercourse.


Reproductive organs of the male




                                                                      Figure                    34

Urethra: a tubule located inside the penis for urine excretion and semen ejaculation .Contains
smooth muscle that performs rapid peristalsis during ejaculation .
Penis: a copulatory organ that is responsible for delivering the sperm to the female reproductive
tract. Contains 2 erectile tissues called corpus cavernosa and corpus spongiosum, where the
latter one enlarges and forms the glans penis due to increased blood flow during sexual
excitation.
During sexual excitement, parasympathetic nerves cause vasodilatation in the penis, allowing
erectile tissues to swell and erect the penis.
During ejaculation, sympathetic nerves cause vas deferens, urethra and erectile tissues to
contract, forcefully expelling semen (a mixture of sex gland fluids and about 300 million sperm)
outward.

Seminiferous Tubules
About 1,000 seminiferous tubules in each testis conduct spermatogenesis.
Between the tubules are specialized glandular cells called interstitial cells (or leydig's cells )
which produce testosterone.
Inside the tubules are specialized cells called sertoli's cells which support and nourish the sperm.

                                                                                              cxxxv
Spermatogenesis
Spermatogonia (containing 46 chromosomes) undergo DNA replication and produce primary
spermatocytes (with 46 pairs of chromosomes) .[some spermatozoid undergo mitosis to
maintain a large population , so that spermatogenesis can be continuous for many decades ].
Primary spermatocytes undergo "crossing - over" to shuffle their genes ,and undergo meiosis I
which results in secondary spermatocytes (each containing 46 unique chromosomes) .
 Secondary spermatocytes undergo meiosis II which produces spermatids (with 23 unique
chromosomes).
 Spermatids now transform themselves into spermatozoa (also containing 23 unique
chromosomes) in a final event called spermatogenesis.


Female reproductive system
Ovary:
 Primary sex organ that produces egg cells in a process called oogenesis, and also produces
female sex hormones such as estrogens and progesterone.
Developed near the kidneys during fetal development, and toward the end of pregnancy descend
into the pelvic cavity.
Consists of ovarian cortex where the ovarian cycle occurs and ovarian medulla where scar
tissues and connective tissue are located.
Enclosed by a layer of cubical cells called germinal epithelium.
Bound to the uterine tubes and uterus by ovarian ligaments.

Figure 35: Internal reproductive organs of a female




                                                                                       cxxxvi
Structure of an ovary




Figure 36

Uterine tube (or fallopian tube): consists of firmbriae, finger – like appendages that collect the
ovum from the ovary during ovulation.
 Infundibulum channels the ovum from the firmbriae into the uterine tube.
Ampulla is the curvature of the uterine tube where most fertilization occurs.
Inner wall of uterine tube is made of ciliated mucosa, where the cilia propel the ovum toward
the uterus.

Uterus
A pear – shaped cavity formed by the union of the two uterine tubes .
Composed of 3 layers of tissue – perimetrium (fibrous connective tissue) , myometrium (smooth
muscle), and endometrium (epithelial and connective tissues) .
 After fertilization, embryo adheres to the endometrial layer for further development – an event
called implantation.
To prepare for implantation and development, endometrium is stimulated by estrogens to
thicken and becomes vascularzed – a process called the menstrual cycle.
Myometrium, under the stimulation of oxytocin, contracts during labor to expel the fetus into
the vagina.
The base of uterus is closed by a narrow passageway called cervix to prevent the entry of foreign
substances.

Vagina: an elastic channel inferior to the cervix that serves as the "birth canal" during
parturition. Also serves as the copulatory receptacle , where it receives the penis during sexual
intercourse. In addition to the acids secretion from cervix, it also coveys uterine secretions (i.e.
menstrual flow).



Oogenesis
In the ovarian cortex, a process called oogenesis (formation of egg) occurs to develop a mature
ovum. Before birth , several million cells called primordial oocytes exist in the ovaries – most
of them spontaneously degenerate .
                                                                                             cxxxvii
At birth, only 1 million primordial oocytes are left ; and by puberty (age 10-11) ,only 400,000
remain in the ovaries .
From puberty to menopause, some of these primordial oocytes (containing 46 chromosomes)
undergo DNA replication and become primary oocytes (with 46 pairs of chromosomes).
Primary oocytes will then undergo "crossing - over" to shuffle their genes, and meiosis I will
occur to divide the cells into secondary oocytes (containing 46 unique chromosomes) and the
first polar bodies (also containing 46 unique chromosomes ; but will be degenerated).

Oogenesis now is arrested where Events of oogenesis the ovary discharges a mature secondary
oocyte into the uterine tube (in a process called ovulation) .
Meiosis II is reactivated when this secondary oocyte is fertilized by a sperm (if no fertilization
occurs, secondary oocyte is discarded along with the menstrual flow), instantly dividing the 46
chromosomes into 23 (inside the second polar body) and another 23 will be united with the 23
chromosomes released from the sperm.




Mechanism of erection, lubrication, and orgasm in human female
1. Sexual stimulation.
2. Arteries in the erectile tissue dilate, vagina expands and elongates
 3. Engorged and swollen vagina increases friction from movement of penis.
4. Parasympathetic nerves impulses from sacral portion of the spinal nerve is enhanced.
5. Sexual stimulation intensifies.
6. Vestibule glands secrete mucus to lubricate.
7. Orgasm: rhythmic contraction of muscles of the perineum, muscular walls of uterus, and
uterine tube.


Hormonal control of reproductive function
Hormones from the hypothalamus,
Anterior Pituitary gland and ovaries, play important roles in the control of sex cell maturation,
and development and maintenance of female secondary sex characteristics.
Female sex hormones:
A female body remains reproductively immature until about 10 years of age when gonadotropin
secretion increases.
The most important female sex hormones are estrogen and progesterone.
 Estrogen is responsible for the development and maintenance of most female secondary sex
characteristics.
Progesterone causes change in the uterus.


Hormonal control of secondary sex characteristic
The hypothalamus releases GnRH, which stimulates the Ant. Pituitary gland.
The Ant. pituitary gland secretes FSH and LH.
                                                                                           cxxxviii
FSH stimulates the maturation of a follicle.
Granulose cells of the follicle produce and secrete estrogen; LH stimulated certain cells to
secrete estrogen precursor molecules.
 Estrogen is responsible for the development and maintenance of most female secondary sex
characteristics.
Concentration of Androgens affects other secondary sex characteristics, including skeletal
growth and growth of hair.
Progesterone, secreted by the ovaries, affect cyclical changes in the uterus and mammary glands.


Ovarian cycle
A series of event in the ovarian cortex in order to produce a mature ovum and sex hormones.
Lasts for about 28 days, where from day 1 to 13 the mature ovum is developed and estrogens
are released, on day 14 ovulation occurs to discharge the ovum , and from day 15 to 28 scar
tissues are formed and progesterone is released . On day 1, hypothalamus secretes Latinizing
hormone releasing hormone (LHRH) to the anterior pituitary gland, which in turn secretes
follicle – stimulating hormone (FSH) to the ovaries. Upon receiving FSH, about 20-25 primary
follicles develop into secondary follicles. (Primary oocytes located inside primary follicles
undergo meiosis I and become secondary oocoytes, contained in secondary follicles).

Follicular cells in secondary follicles begin to secrete estrogens (for communicating with
hypothalamus and anterior pituitary and for developing the endometrium) .
With continuous stimulation of FSH and some Latinizing hormone (LH) ,secondary follicles
continue to grow larger and develop multiple layers of follicular cells (while the secondary
oocytes within are unchanged).
 By day 13 , only 1 secondary follicle will fully mature and become the graafian follicle (or
mature follicle) which secretes a large amount of estrogens to the hypothalamus – anterior
pituitary system for signaling ovulation (using a positive feedback mechanism).
 On day 14 , large amounts of LH ("LH surge") will be secreted by anterior pituitary , inducing
ovulation where the graafian follicle ruptures and releases the secondary oocyte into uterine tube
.

From days 15 to 25 , graafian follicle degenerates and becomes corpus hemorrhagicum ("a
bleeding body") then corpus luteum ("a yellow body"; containing lutein cells that secrete
progesterone and some estrogens to continuum stimulating the development of endometrium).
 By day 26 , if no fertilization occurs to the secondary oocyte, resulting in a lack of human
chorionic Gonadotropin hormone (HCG) from the embryo , corpus luteum degenerates into
corpus albicans . [if fertilization did occur , HCG will continuously simulate corpus luteum for
2-3 months , allowing high levels of estrogens and progesterone to maintain pregnancy in the
first trimester] .
 When corpus luteum degenerates, the declining levels of estrogens and progesterone will signal
the hypothalamus – anterior pituitary system to initiate another ovarian cycle.

Fertilization

                                                                                            cxxxix
Fertilization, union of a sperm nucleus, of paternal origin, with an egg nucleus, of maternal
origin, to form the primary nucleus of an embryo. In all organisms the essence of fertilization
is, in fact, the fusion of the hereditary material of two different sex cells, or gametes, each of
which carries half the number of chromosomes typical of the species. The most primitive form
of fertilization, found in microorganisms and protozoans, consists of an exchange of genetic
material between two cells.
The first significant event in fertilization is the fusion of the membranes of the two gametes,
resulting in the formation of a channel that allows the passage of material from one cell to the
other. Fertilization in advanced plants is preceded by pollination, during which pollen is
transferred to, and establishes contact with, the female gamete or macrospore. Fusion in
advanced animals is usually followed by penetration of the egg by a single spermatozoon. The
result of fertilization is a cell (zygote) capable of undergoing cell division to form a new
individual.

The fusion of two gametes initiates several reactions in the egg. One of these causes a change in
the egg membrane(s), so that the attachment of and penetration by more than one spermatozoon
cannot occur. In species in which more than one spermatozoon normally enters an egg
(polyspermy), only one spermatozoal nucleus actually merges with the egg nucleus. The most
important result of fertilization is egg activation, which allows the egg to undergo cell division.
Activation, however, does not necessarily require the intervention of a spermatozoon;
during parthenogenesis, in which fertilization does not occur, activation of an egg may be
accomplished through the intervention of physical and chemical agents. Invertebrates such
as aphids, bees, and rotifers normally reproduce by parthenogenesis.

                               39      Maturation Of The Egg
Maturation is the final step in the production of functional eggs (oogenesis) that can associate
with a spermatozoon and develop a reaction that prevents the entry of more than one
spermatozoon. In addition, the cytoplasm of a mature egg can support the changes that lead to
fusion of spermatozoal and egg nuclei and initiate embryonic development.

                                      40      Egg surface

Certain components of an egg’s surface, especially the cortical granules, are associated with a
mature condition. Cortical granules of sea urchin eggs, aligned beneath the plasma membrane
(thin, soft, pliable layer) of mature eggs, have a diameter of 0.8–1.0 micron (0.0008–0.001
millimetre) and are surrounded by a membrane similar in structure to the plasma
membrane surrounding the egg. Cortical granules are formed in a cell component known as
a Golgi complex, from which they migrate to the surface of the maturing egg.

The surface of a sea urchin egg has the ability to affect the passage of light unequally in different
directions; this property, called birefringence, is an indication that the molecules comprising the
surface layers are arranged in a definite way. Since birefringence appears as an egg matures, it
is likely that the properties of a mature egg membrane are associated with specific molecular
arrangements. A mature egg is able to support the formation of a zygote nucleus; i.e., the result
                                                                                                  cxl
  of fusion of spermatozoal and egg nuclei. In most eggs the process of reduction of chromosomal
  number (meiosis) is not completed prior to fertilization. In such cases the fertilizing
  spermatozoon remains beneath the egg surface until meiosis in the egg has been completed, after
  which changes and movements that lead to fusion and the formation of a zygote occur.

                                         41     Egg coats

  The surfaces of most animal eggs are surrounded by envelopes, which may be soft gelatinous
  coats (as in echinoderms and some amphibians) or thick membranes (as in fishes, insects, and
  mammals). In order to reach the egg surface, therefore, spermatozoa must penetrate these
  envelopes; indeed, spermatozoa contain enzymes (organic catalysts) that break them down. In
  some cases (e.g., fishes and insects) there is a channel, or micropyle, in the envelope, through
  which a spermatozoon can reach the egg.

  The jelly coats of echinoderm and amphibian eggs consist of complex carbohydrates called
  sulfated mucopolysaccharides. The envelope of a mammalian egg is more complex. The egg is
  surrounded by a thick coat composed of a carbohydrate protein complex called zona pellucida.
  The zona is surrounded by an outer envelope, the corona radiata, which is many cell layers thick
  and formed by follicle cells adhering to the oocyte before it leaves the ovarian follicle.

  Although it once was postulated that the jelly coat of an echinoderm egg contains a substance
  (fertilizin) thought to have an important role not only in the establishment of sperm-egg
  interaction but also in egg activation, fertilizin now has been shown identical with jelly-coat
  material, rather than a substance continuously secreted from it. Yet there is evidence that the
  egg envelopes do play a role in fertilization; i.e., contact with the egg coat elicits the acrosome
  reaction (described below) in spermatozoa.

Events Of Fertilization

                                  42     Sperm-egg association

  The acrosome reaction of spermatozoa is a prerequisite for the association between a
  spermatozoon and an egg, which occurs through fusion of their plasma membranes. After a
  spermatozoon comes in contact with an egg, the acrosome, which is a prominence at the anterior
  tip of the spermatozoa, undergoes a series of well-defined structural changes. A structure within
  the acrosome, called the acrosomal vesicle, bursts, and the plasma membrane surrounding the
  spermatozoon fuses at the acrosomal tip with the membrane surrounding the acrosomal vesicle
  to form an opening. As the opening is formed, the acrosomal granule, which is enclosed within
  the acrosomal vesicle, disappears. The dissolution of the granule releases a substance called
  a lysin, which breaks down the egg’s vitelline coat, allowing passage of the spermatozoon to the
  egg. The acrosomal membrane region opposite the opening adheres to the nuclear envelope of
  the spermatozoon and forms a shallow out pocketing, which rapidly elongates into a thin tube,
  the acrosomal tubule that extends to the egg surface and fuses with the egg plasma membrane.
                                                                                                 cxli
The tubule thus formed establishes continuity between the egg and the spermatozoon and
provides a way for the spermatozoal nucleus to reach the interior of the egg. Other spermatozoal
structures that may be carried within the egg include the midpiece and part of the tail; the
spermatozoal plasma membrane and the acrosomal membrane, however, do not reach the
interior of the egg. In fact, whole spermatozoa injected into unfertilized eggs cannot elicit the
activation reaction or merge with the egg nucleus. As the spermatozoal nucleus is drawn within
the egg, the spermatozoal plasma membrane breaks down; at the end of the process, the
continuity of the egg plasma membrane is re-established. This description of the process of
sperm-egg association, first documented for the acorn worm Saccoglossus (phylum
Enteropneusta), generally applies to most eggs studied thus far.




Figure 37:
During their passage through the female genital tract of mammals, spermatozoa undergo
physiological change, called capacitation, which is a prerequisite for their participation in
fertilization; they are able to undergo the acrosome reaction, traverse the egg envelopes, and
reach the interior of the egg. Dispersal of cells in the outer egg envelope (corona radiata) is
caused by the action of an enzyme (hyaluronidase) that breaks down a substance (hyaluronic
acid) binding corona radiata cells together. The enzyme may be contained in the acrosome and
released as a result of the acrosome reaction, during passage of the spermatozoon through the
corona radiata. The reaction is well advanced by the time a spermatozoon contacts the thick coat
surrounding the egg itself (zona pellucida). The pathway of a spermatozoon through the zona
pellucida appears to be an oblique slit created by the oscillation of the sperm’s head near the
point of its attachment to the zona pellucida.

Association of a mammalian spermatozoon with the egg surface occurs along the lateral surface
of the spermatozoon, rather than at the tip as in other animals, so that the spermatozoon lies flat
                                                                                               cxlii
on the egg surface. Several points of fusion occur between the plasma membranes of the two
gametes (i.e., the breakdown of membranes occurs by formation of numerous small vesicles).

                        43      Specificity of sperm-egg interaction

Fertilization is strictly species-specific, and the egg’s coating, the zona pellucida, plays an
important role in the binding process between sperm and egg. In general, the biochemistry of
the zona pellucida of one species differs from that of another, and thus it only matches up and
binds with sperm of the appropriate species. For example, among the echinoderms, solutions of
the jelly coat clump, or agglutinate, only spermatozoa of their own species. In both echinoderms
and amphibians, however, slight damage to an egg surface makes fertilization possible with
spermatozoa of different species (heterologous fertilization); this procedure has been used to
obtain certain hybrid larvae. In addition, binding between sperm and egg of different species
may occur when the zona pellucida of the egg is removed.

The eggs of ascidians, or sea squirts, members of the chordate subphylum Tunicata, are covered
with a thick membrane called a chorion. The space between the chorion and the egg is filled
with cells called test cells. The gametes of ascidians, which have both male and female
reproductive organs in one animal, mature at the same time, yet self-fertilization does not occur.
If the chorion and the test cells are removed, however, not only is fertilization with spermatozoa
of different species possible, but self-fertilization also can occur.

                             44      Prevention of polyspermy

Most animal eggs are monospermic; i.e., only one spermatozoon is admitted into an egg. In
some eggs, protection against the penetration of the egg by more than one spermatozoon
(polyspermy) is due to some property of the egg surface; in others, however, the egg envelopes
are responsible. The ability of some eggs to develop a polyspermy-preventing reaction depends
on a molecular rearrangement of the egg surface that occurs during egg maturation (oogenesis).
Although immature sea urchin eggs have the ability to associate with spermatozoa, they also
allow multiple penetration; i.e., they are unable to develop a polyspermy-preventing reaction.
Since the mature eggs of most animals are fertilized before completion of meiosis and are able
to develop a polyspermy-preventing reaction, specific properties of the egg surface must
have differentiated by the time meiosis stops, which is when the egg is ready to be fertilized.

In some mammalian eggs defense against polyspermy depends on properties of the zona
pellucida; i.e., when a spermatozoon has started to move through the zona, it does not allow the
penetration of additional spermatozoa (zona reaction). In other mammals, however, the zona
reaction either does not take place or is weak, as indicated by the presence of numerous
spermatozoa in the space between the zona and egg surface. In such cases the polyspermy-
preventing reaction resides in the egg surface. Although the eggs of some kinds of animals (e.g.,
some amphibians, birds, reptiles, and sharks) are naturally polyspermic, only one spermatozoal
nucleus fuses with an egg nucleus to form a zygote nucleus; all of the other spermatozoa
degenerate.
                                                                                             cxliii
                     45        Formation of the fertilization membrane

The most spectacular changes that follow fertilization occur at the egg surface. The best known
example, that of the sea urchin egg, is described below. An immediate response to fertilization
is the raising of a membrane, called a vitelline membrane, from the egg surface. In the beginning
the membrane is very thin; soon, however, it thickens, develops a well-organized molecular
structure, and is called the fertilization membrane. At the same time an extensive rearrangement
of the molecular structure of the egg surface occurs. The events leading to formation of the
fertilization membrane require about one minute.

At the point on the outer surface of the sea urchin egg at which a spermatozoan attaches, the thin
vitelline membrane becomes detached. As a result the membranes of the cortical granules come
into contact with the inner aspect of the egg’s plasma membrane and fuse with it, the granules
open, and their contents are extruded into the perivitelline space; i.e., the space between the egg
surface and the raised vitelline membrane. Part of the contents of the granules merge with the
vitelline membrane to form the fertilization membrane; if fusion of the contents of the cortical
granules with the vitelline membrane is prevented, the membrane remains thin and soft. Another
material that also derives from the cortical granules covers the surface of the egg to form a
transparent layer, called the hyaline layer, which plays an important role in holding together the
cells (blastomeres) formed during division, or cleavage, of the egg. The plasma membrane
surrounding a fertilized egg, therefore, is a mosaic structure containing patches of the original
plasma membrane of the unfertilized egg and areas derived from membranes of the cortical
granules. The events leading to the formation of the fertilization membrane are accompanied by
a change of the electric charge across the plasma membrane, referred to as the fertilization
potential, and a concurrent outflow of potassium ions (charged particles); both of these
phenomena are similar to those that occur in a stimulated nerve fibre. Another effect of
fertilization on the plasma membrane of the egg is a several-fold increase in its permeability to
various molecules. This change may be the result of the activation of some surface-located
membrane transport mechanism.

                          46       Formation of the zygote nucleus

After its entry into the egg cytoplasm, the spermatozoal nucleus, now called the
male pronucleus, begins to swell, and its chromosomal material disperses and becomes similar
in appearance to that of the female pronucleus. Although the membranous envelope surrounding
the male pronucleus rapidly disintegrates in the egg, a new envelope promptly forms around it.
The male pronucleus, which rotates 180° and moves towards the egg nucleus, initially is
accompanied by two structures (centrioles) that function in cell division. After the male and
female pronuclei have come into contact, the spermatozoal centrioles give rise to the first
cleavage spindle, which precedes division of the fertilized egg. In some cases fusion of the two
pronuclei may occur by a process of membrane fusion; in this process, two adjoining membranes
fuse at the point of contact to give rise to the continuous nuclear envelope that surrounds the
zygote nucleus.


                                                                                              cxliv
1.2.16.4: Self Assessment
a). Describe formation of the zygote nucleus
b). Highlight the specificity of sperm egg intergration
c). Describe the ovarian cycle

1.2.16.4.1: Responses
a). Describe formation of the zygote nucleus
After its entry into the egg cytoplasm, the spermatozoal nucleus, now called the
male pronucleus, begins to swell, and its chromosomal material disperses and becomes similar
in appearance to that of the female pronucleus. Although the membranous envelope surrounding
the male pronucleus rapidly disintegrates in the egg, a new envelope promptly forms around it.
The male pronucleus, which rotates 180° and moves towards the egg nucleus, initially is
accompanied by two structures (centrioles) that function in cell division. After the male and
female pronuclei have come into contact, the spermatozoal centrioles give rise to the first
cleavage spindle, which precedes division of the fertilized egg. In some cases fusion of the two
pronuclei may occur by a process of membrane fusion; in this process, two adjoining membranes
fuse at the point of contact to give rise to the continuous nuclear envelope that surrounds the
zygote nucleus.



b). Highlight the specificity of sperm egg integration
Fertilization is strictly species-specific, and the egg’s coating, the zona pellucida, plays an
important role in the binding process between sperm and egg. In general, the biochemistry of
the zona pellucida of one species differs from that of another, and thus it only matches up and
binds with sperm of the appropriate species. For example, among the echinoderms, solutions of
the jelly coat clump, or agglutinate, only spermatozoa of their own species. In both echinoderms
and amphibians, however, slight damage to an egg surface makes fertilization possible with
spermatozoa of different species (heterologous fertilization); this procedure has been used to
obtain certain hybrid larvae. In addition, binding between sperm and egg of different species
may occur when the zona pellucida of the egg is removed.

The eggs of ascidians, or sea squirts, members of the chordate subphylum Tunicata, are covered
with a thick membrane called a chorion. The space between the chorion and the egg is filled
with cells called test cells. The gametes of ascidians, which have both male and female
reproductive organs in one animal, mature at the same time, yet self-fertilization does not occur.
If the chorion and the test cells are removed, however, not only is fertilization with spermatozoa
of different species possible, but self-fertilization also can occur.



c). Describe the ovarian cycle
A series of event in the ovarian cortex in order to produce a mature ovum and sex hormones.
Lasts for about 28 days, where from day 1 to 13 the mature ovum is developed and estrogens
are released, on day 14 ovulation occurs to discharge the ovum , and from day 15 to 28 scar
tissues are formed and progesterone is released . On day 1, hypothalamus secretes Latinizing
                                                                                              cxlv
hormone releasing hormone (LHRH) to the anterior pituitary gland, which in turn secretes
follicle – stimulating hormone (FSH) to the ovaries. Upon receiving FSH, about 20-25 primary
follicles develop into secondary follicles. (Primary oocytes located inside primary follicles
undergo meiosis I and become secondary oocoytes, contained in secondary follicles).

Follicular cells in secondary follicles begin to secrete estrogens (for communicating with
hypothalamus and anterior pituitary and for developing the endometrium) .
With continuous stimulation of FSH and some Latinizing hormone (LH) ,secondary follicles
continue to grow larger and develop multiple layers of follicular cells (while the secondary
oocytes within are unchanged).
 By day 13 , only 1 secondary follicle will fully mature and become the graafian follicle (or
mature follicle) which secretes a large amount of estrogens to the hypothalamus – anterior
pituitary system for signaling ovulation (using a positive feedback mechanism).
 On day 14 , large amounts of LH ("LH surge") will be secreted by anterior pituitary , inducing
ovulation where the graafian follicle ruptures and releases the secondary oocyte into uterine tube
.
From days 15 to 25 , graafian follicle degenerates and becomes corpus hemorrhagicum ("a
bleeding body") then corpus luteum ("a yellow body"; containing lutein cells that secrete
progesterone and some estrogens to continuum stimulating the development of endometrium).
 By day 26 , if no fertilization occurs to the secondary oocyte, resulting in a lack of human
chorionic Gonadotropin hormone (HCG) from the embryo , corpus luteum degenerates into
corpus albicans . [if fertilization did occur , HCG will continuously simulate corpus luteum for
2-3 months , allowing high levels of estrogens and progesterone to maintain pregnancy in the
first trimester] .
 When corpus luteum degenerates, the declining levels of estrogens and progesterone will signal
the hypothalamus – anterior pituitary system to initiate another ovarian cycle.

1.2.16.5: References
  1. Introduction to the Reproductive System, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER)
      Program. Archived October 24, 2007, at the Wayback Machine
  2. ^ Reproductive System 2001 Body Guide powered by Adam
  3. ^ STD's Today National Prevention Network, Center for Disease Control, United States
      Government, retrieving 2007
  4. ^ Sexual Reproduction in Humans. 2006. John W. Kimball. Kimball's Biology Pages, and
      online textbook.
  5. ^ Schultz, Nicholas G., et al. "The baculum was gained and lost multiple times during
      mammalian evolution." Integrative and comparative biology 56.4 (2016): 644-656.
  6. ^ Werdelin L, Nilsonne A (January 1999). "The evolution of the scrotum and testicular
      descent in mammals: a phylogenetic view". J. Theor. Biol. 196 (1): 61–
      72. doi:10.1006/jtbi.1998.0821




                                                                                             cxlvi
CHAPTER 2……




              cxlvii
  TABLE OF CONTENT
FOREWORD .................................................................................. Error! Bookmark not defined.
PREFACE ....................................................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT ............................................................. Error! Bookmark not defined.
ACRONYMS ............................................................................................................................. 204
LIST OF FIGURES ..................................................................................................................... cl
Background Information ......................................................................................................... 204
Layout of the Trainee Guide...................................................................................................... cli
Introduction to the unit of learning ........................................................................................ 204
Summary of Learning Outcomes ............................................................................................ 204
CHAPTER 1 .............................................................................................................................. 205
  1.1 Learning Outcome 1: Demonstrate the knowledge of a health facility set up .................. 205
   1.2 Introduction to the learning outcome ................................................................................ 204
   1.3. Performance Standard ...................................................................................................... 205
   1.4 Information Sheet .............................................................................................................. 205
       1.4.1 Meaning of terms ....................................................................................................... 205
       1.4.2 Management structure and ministerial organogram ................................................... 206
       1.4.3. Types of departments in a health facility .................................................................. 209
       1.4.4 Levels of health facilities ........................................................................................... 218
       1.4.5 Theatre layout and units ............................................................................................. 223
   1.5 Learning Activities ............................................................................................................ 228
       1.5.1 Practical activity ......................................................................................................... 228
       1.5.2 Self-Assessment Questions ........................................................................................ 229
       1.5.3 Answers to Self-Assessment questions ...................................................................... 229
   1.6 Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials ....................................................................... 232
   1.7 References ......................................................................................................................... 233
CHAPTER 2 .................................................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined.
 2.1 Learning Outcome 2: Demonstrate the knowledge of medical equipment in basic patient care
 ................................................................................................................................................. 234
   2.2 Introduction to the learning outcome ................................................................................ 234
   2.3. Performance Standard ...................................................................................................... 234
   2.4 Information sheet .............................................................................................................. 234
       2.4.1 Meaning of terms ....................................................................................................... 234
       2.4.2 Types of health facility equipment/instruments and functions .................................. 235

                                                                                                                                              cxlviii
   2.4.3 Care and maintenance of health facility equipment and instruments ........................ 242
2.5 Learning Activities ............................................................................................................ 247
   2.5.1 Practical activity ......................................................................................................... 247
   2.5.2 Self-Assessment Questions ........................................................................................ 247
   2.5.3 Answers to Self-Assessment questions ...................................................................... 248
2.6 Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials ....................................................................... 250
2.7 References ......................................................................................................................... 251




                                                                                                                                      cxlix
                                               LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1: Organizational chart of Ministry of Health structure .................................................. 208
Figure 2: Generic organogram of district hospitals in Kenya. *Medical officers here refer to
physicians while clinical officers are “non-physician” clinicians as described in 16................. 209
Figure 3: Organization of health services in Kenya under a devolved system. .......................... 222
Figure 4: Medical Theatre layout ................................................................................................ 225
Figure 5: Theatre layout .............................................................................................................. 228




                                                                                                                                        cl
                                  Background Information

This learning guide will enable the trainee to acquire competencies to undertake various
processes in POTT Level 6. It provides practical and theoretical learning activities, simplified
content, illustrations and self-assessment items to guide the trainee in the learning process. It
also provides links and references for further reading.

                                Layout of the Trainee Guide

Performance standards: These are obtained from the performance criteria statements in the
related unit of competency of the Occupational Standards (OS)
Information Sheet: This section covers information relating to the specific learning outcome.
This information should include but not limited to meaning of terms, methods, processes/
procedures/ guidelines, Illustrations (photographs, pictures, videos, charts, plans, digital content
links, simulations links) and case studies. This section also provides additional information
sources relevant to the learning outcome e.g. books, web links
Learning activities: This section covers practical activities related to the Performance Criteria
statements, Knowledge in relation to Performance Criteria as given under content in the
curriculum Special instructions related to learning activities
Self-Assessment: This section must be related to the Performance Criteria, Required Knowledge
and Skills in the Occupational Standards. This section requires the trainee to evaluate their
acquisition of skills, knowledge and attitude in relation to the learning outcome. A variety of
assessment items such as written and practical tests which emphasizes on the application of
knowledge, skills and attitude is recommended
The self-assessment items should be valid, relevant and comprehensive to the level of
qualification in the learning outcome
Tools, equipment, materials and supplies: This section should provide for the requirements
of the learning outcome in terms of tools, equipment, supplies and materials. The section should
be adequate, relevant and comprehensive for the learning outcome.
References: Information sources should be quoted and presented as required in the APA format
The units of learning covered in this learning guide are as presented in the table below:




                                                                                                 cli
CHAPTER 3; BASIC HOSPITAL PROCEDURES
UNIT CODE: HE/CU/TT/CC/02/6/A
Related Unit of Competency in Occupational Standard: Apply basic hospital procedures

                            Introduction to the unit of learning
This unit specifies the competencies required to apply basic hospital procedures. It involves
demonstrating the knowledge of a health facility set up, medical equipment in basic patient care
identifying elements of total-patient-care and applying basic patient care procedures.
                              Summary of Learning Outcomes
  1. Demonstrate the knowledge of a health facility set up
  2. Demonstrate the knowledge of medical equipment in basic patient care
  3. Identify elements of total-patient-care
  4. Apply basic patient care procedures




                                                                                             clii
                                                CHAPTER 1
47        1.1 Learning Outcome 1: Demonstrate the knowledge of a health facility set up
                         48        1.2 Introduction to the learning outcome
This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to demonstrate the
knowledge of a health facility set up. It comprises meaning of terms, types of departments in a
health facility, Management structure and ministerial organogram, levels of health facilities,
theatre layout, units in a theatre learning activities, self-assessment questions and answers,
learning activities, tools, equipment, supplies and materials and references.
                                   49        1.3. Performance Standard
1.3.1 Existing departments in a health facility are identified as per the institution’s policy
1.3.2 Management structure is identified as per the MoH organogram
1.3.3 Service charter is identified as per the institutional framework
1.3.4 Theatre layout is described as per WHO standards
                                        50     1.4 Information Sheet
     1.4.1 Meaning of terms
      A health facility is, in general, any location where healthcare is provided. They include hospitals,
       clinics, outpatient care centers, and specialized care centers, such as birthing centers and
       psychiatric care centers.
      Healthcare facility means an office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases,
       whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical, physiological, or psychological
       conditions, including but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics,
       including weight control clinics, nursing homes, long-term care facilities, homes for the aging or
       chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists,
       physicians, psychiatrists, dentists, and all specialists within these professions. This definition
       shall include all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within
       health care facilities.
      A medical procedure is a course of action intended to achieve a result in the delivery of
       healthcare.
      Medical test is a procedure with the intention of determining, measuring, or diagnosing a
       patient condition or parameter.


                                                                                                            1
  1.4.2 Management structure and ministerial organogram
Hospitals require precision in the execution of job responsibilities and multiple layers of
accountability in order to function. To accomplish this, hospitals use a vertical organizational
structure with many layers of management.
Understanding hospital organizational structure ensures that hospital employees know their own
responsibilities, the responsibilities of those around them, to whom they report and who to talk
to about particular responsibilities or fields of knowledge.
The Organizational Structure of Hospitals
Board
All hospitals include some form of governing body responsible for making high-level decisions
about the organization. A hospital’s board of directors is often drawn from the healthcare
community and is made up of experts in their respective fields. Religiously affiliated hospitals
often include clergy on their boards of directors. Teaching hospitals often include university
faculty from the medical school with which they’re affiliated.
Executives
Hospital executives are responsible for managing the organization, making financial decisions
and overseeing business strategy. Medical and health services managers may oversee entire
practices or clinical areas. A hospital typically has a chief financial officer who tends to the
financial health of the business and a chief operating officer or chief executive officer
responsible for high level business strategy and decision making.
Department Administrators
Department administrators report to the hospital executives and manage the day-to-day
operations of specific departments within a hospital. The chief of surgery, for example, is
responsible for overseeing daily activities within the surgical department as well as performing
surgery. A chief of surgery might engage in public relations activities, fundraising and
recruitment. Non-medical departments within a hospital, such as food services or switchboard
personnel, also have department administrators.
Patient Care Managers
Nurse managers and supervising physicians are both patient care managers. These individuals
manage small groups of professionals who provide direct patient care. They ensure that orders

                                                                                              2
are carried out, that hospital employees are fulfilling their duties appropriately and that
employees are complying with legal requirements.
Service Providers
The vast majority of hospital workers are service providers: doctors, nurses, orderlies, physical
therapists, laundry workers and the many other people required in order for a hospital to
function. They provide patient care, maintain records and ensure that the hospital is able to
deliver care to patients in an effective manner.




                                                                                               3
Figure 1: Organizational chart of Ministry of Health structure

Source:      https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Organizational-chart-of-Ministry-of-Health-
structure_fig10_237624652
                                                                                          4
Figure 2: Generic organogram of district hospitals in Kenya. *Medical officers here refer
to physicians while clinical officers are “non-physician” clinicians as described in 16

Source:      https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Generic-organogram-of-district-hospitals-in-
Kenya-Medical-officers-here-refer-to_fig1_235739577


  1.4.3. Types of departments in a health facility
Departments in Hospital
There are several departments are found in hospitals namely Outpatient department (OPD),
Inpatient Service (IP), Medical Department, Nursing Department, Paramedical Department,
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Department, Operation Theatre Complex (OT), Pharmacy
Department, Radiology Department (X-ray), Dietary Department, Non-professional Services
(Business Management), Medical Record Department (MRD) and Personnel Department.
Outpatient Department (OPD)
                                                                                           5
Most hospitals now have an OPD. The advantage of OPD is that much of the investigative unit
and curative work can be done there without admitting the client, thus curtailing medical
expenses.


The scope of OPD includes the following:
 a. Consultation, investigation, procedures, specialty services.
 b. Preventive and promotive health care: Clinics, which include: diabetic, antenatal, postnasal and
     under five.
 c. Rehabilitation services (physiotherapy, occupational therapy etc)
 d. Health education
 e. Counseling
Inpatient Service (IP)
If OPD is the show window of the hospital, the IP is the heart of the hospital. The IP service
provides lodging, diet and medical care. Conveniently, it can be divided into:
 a. Wards and rooms
 b. Nurses station
 c. Dietary services
Sanitary facilities and other requirements


Medical department
The medical department has within it the various clinical services. They are: medicine, surgery,
gynaecology, obstetrics, paediatrics, eye, ENT, dental, orthopaedics, neurology, cardiology,
psychiatry, skin, V.D., plastic surgery, nuclear medicine, infectious disease etc. medical
superintendent is a doctor who has control over all medical department.


Nursing department
The nursing department is the organizational structure through which nurses provide nursing
care for clients under the jurisdiction of the institution. The nursing department consists of
nursing service and nursing education. The primary purpose of the nursing service is to provide
comprehensive, safe, effective and well-organized nursing care through the personnel of the
                                                                                                       6
department. The personnel consists of nursing superintendent, assistant nursing superintendents,
head nurses and staff nurses. All of these are registered nurses, other personnel who function in
the nursing service department may include the auxiliary personnel nurse aids and domestics
who handle the non-nursing services.
The nursing education section has the responsibility of preparing nursing students to become
professional nurses. Uplifting the standard of nursing by inservice education and refresher
courses etc., are included in the functions of this department. The personnel consists of principal
or director of nursing education, the associate professors, assistant professors, tutors and clinical
instructors.
Pharmacy Department
Pharmacy is a crucial factor in medical factor. It should be planned and organized well. The
pharmacy department has the responsibility for selecting purchasing, compounding, storing and
dispensing all drugs and medications. The pharmacy should be under the supervision of a
registered pharmacist.
Radiology Department (X-ray Department)
The department must be located in a place where there is easy accessibility for OP and IP
clients. Of the total space, the distribution for various rooms is as follows:
 a. X-ray rooms: 25%
 b. Film processing: 10%
 c. Administration: 30%
 d. Waiting area: 5%
 e. Circulation area: 30%
Sufficient number of staff should be available. Staff must be protected against radiation
hazards.
This department has the following services.
 a. Radiographic examinations and their interpretations
 b. X-ray, radium, radioactive cobalt and other radioactive therapy
 c. Ultrasonography, Echocardiogram, C.T. Scan, MRI and ECG.
Dietary Department




                                                                                                   7
The dietary department has the responsibility for the food service to the client according to their
needs and doctor’s prescription. This department is responsible for the health teaching in regard
to proper diet of the client upon their discharge from the hospital.
Non-Professional Services (Business Management)
Admitting Department
The admitting department has the responsibility for admitting the client to the hospital. The
importance of this       department    lies   in   the public relation     that is    maintained.
The client, his family and his friends must be treated with utmost respect, courtesy and tact. The
enquiries made about the hospital and other clients are to be answered appropriately.
Administration
The administration of the entire hospital cannot be vested on the administrator alone. It is a
collective responsibility of a group of people. The administrative staff, depending upon the size
of the hospital, is composed of the administrator, the assistant administrator, the business
manager and the departmental heads.
Purchasing Department
The purchasing department has the responsibility for purchasing all supplies and equipments for
the hospital.
Accounts (Business Office)
This department has the responsibility for collecting the money which is owed to the hospital,
paying for the supplies and equipment, handling all records pertaining to hospital finance,
keeping records of assets and liabilities and assisting with budget. The business manager is
responsible for the functions of the department. The accountants help him.
Housekeeping
The housekeeping department has one main function – to keep the hospital clean.


Laundry
The laundry takes care of the entire team linen of the hospital. It has the following functions:
 a. Washing the dirty linen
 b. Repairing the torn linen
 c. Replacing the condemned linen
Mechanical Department
                                                                                                   8
Electricity, water supply, heat, air-conditioning etc., are looked after by the mechanical
department.
Maintenance Department
The maintenance department keeps the hospital in a good state of repair. Carpenters, painters,
welders, gardeners etc., are included in the personnel of this department.


Central Supply Department
The purpose of the central supply department is to prepare and furnish other departments with
equipment and supplies needed in the client care e.g. syringes, needles, treatment trays.
Social Service
The social service department assists in obtaining financial aid for clients and their families.
This department services also as a liaison between the client and community agencies.
Pastoral Care
Under the leadership of the chaplain, the pastoral care team meets the spiritual needs of the
client.
Some departments function as a part of other departments already mentioned, e.g., the operating
room functions as part of the department of surgery. The outpatient department is a combination
of several departments. The emergency room functions along with the department of medicine.
Sometimes according to the load of client care, the services may be given in special department
such as intensive care, immediate care, and ambulatory care units.
Hospital Waste Management
It is newly set department which takes care of the disposal of the entire waste both solid and
liquid.
Central Sterile Supply Department (CSSD)
This is important department which supplies sterile articles throughout the hospital. CSSD
handles contaminated, clean and sterile articles.
Work flow in CSSD: Receiving – Washing – Drying – Accounting – Sorting – Packing –
Sterilization – Sterile storage – Issue. The articles should move in one direction from receipt to
issue. The location should be such that the wards and departments can have easy access.
Medical Record Department (MRD)

                                                                                                9
This is an integral part of every modern hospital. The guiding principle is “people forget, records
remember.” Functionally the MRD is divided into
(1) Reception
(2) Medical Records Library
(3) Statistical Section.


Weeding out of clients file, is done in successive years:
 a. OP Records: 5 years.
 b. IP Records: 10 years.
 c. Medicolegal Records: 15 years.
Now with computerization the files can be entered into the computer and can be utilized when
required.
Every health care facility should have arrangement for handling medicolegal cases. The hospital
administration, as well as the doctors, nurses and other staff members should be made aware of
the legal implications involved in the client’s care, so that lot of problems can be avoided.
Personnel Department
This department in the hospital must be well versed with law of the land especially the labour
laws and is responsible for recruitment, selection, promotion, transfer, termination etc. The
personnel department functions under the personnel officer who is qualified in the personnel
administration. The personnel department has the following functions, directed to the welfare
of the personnel.
 a. Recruitment of personnel
 b. Interviewing prospective employees
 c. Promotion and transfer of employees
 d. Termination of employment
 e. Inservice training programme
 f.   Remuneration and incentives
 g. Safety
 h. Health programme
 i.   Recreation
Paramedical departments
                                                                                                10
    Paramedical departments are adjunctive to the practice of medicine in the maintenance or
    restoration of health and normal functioning.
    They include:
    Pathology Department
    The following laboratories are usually found in the pathology department:
    Bacteriology laboratory: This laboratory studies about the bacteria and their toxins.
    Biochemistry: this is concerned with the chemistry of living organisms and of vital process.
    Haematology laboratory: it is responsible for making haemoglobin determinations, coagulation time
     studies, red and white cell counts and special blood pathology studies for anaemia and leukaemia
     etc.
    Parasitology laboratory: it studies the presence of parasites, the cyst and ovas of the parasites that
     are found in the faeces.
    Serology laboratory: it does blood agglutination tests, Wassermann tests, V.D.R.L. etc.
    Blood bank: it has the responsibility for collecting and processing all blood used in the hospital for
     transfusions. It makes studies on newborn infants who may have haemolytic diseases and does
     antibody studies on the prenatal client.
    Histopathology department: it prepares tissues for gross and microscopic studies.
    Laboratory services (LAB) must be available day and night. Must be located on the ground floor and
     should be easily accessible to the outpatients. Space requirement of Lab is:
    Primary space: Required for technical work.
    Secondary space: space utilized for administrative purpose.
    Circulation space: for unchattered movement of personnel and equipment.
    There should be sufficient staff and work arrangement for the efficient functioning of the
     department.
    Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Department
    This department deals with clients who have functional disabilities resulting from disease
    conditions/injuries. This department can have physiotherapy, occupational therapy, speech
    therapy and vocational training. This department will be under the direction of a well – qualified
    physician who has special training in the field of physical medicine and rehabilitation. His staff
    should include therapists with qualification in the various specialties.
    Operation Theatre Complex (OT)
                                                                                                              11
This consists of one or more operation theatres and other facilities. OT complex must be located
in a place where there is easy and quick access to the delivery suite. These should be four zone
– outer zone, clean zone, sterile zone, disposal zone. There should be a sterilization room with
an autoclave. The number of OT depends on many factors. There should be an arrangement for
good lighting and ventilation.
Delivery suite is the place where births take place. The delivery suite is divided into three zones
are first stage room, second stage room, delivery room. The room should have good lighting and
ventilation. It should have adequate number of staff.


     1.4.4 Levels of health facilities
Kenya’s Health sector is one of the 14 devolved functions managed by the 47 county
governments as provided in the Fourth Schedule of the 2010 Constitution.
County health facilities and pharmacies, ambulance services, promoting primary health care,
licensing and controlling facilities that sell food to the public and veterinary services are some
of the health-related roles the 47 counties manage. County health facilities and services include
county referral hospitals, sub-county health facilities, environmental health services,
communicable disease control, nutrition, family planning, maternal and child health plus Health
Education.
There are six different levels of health care facilities. The first five are managed on the county
level, the sixth level by the national government. In this system the patients may move from one
level to the next by using a referral letter.


LEVEL 1 – Community Facilities

They are run by certified medical clinical officers.

Some of the services:

      Treatment of minor ailments like diarrhoea
      Tuberculosis (TB) screening, home visits, contact tracing of TB patients and tracing of TB
       defaulters
      Screening of malnutrition
                                                                                                    12
    Malaria rapid test
    Blood pressure and blood sugar testing
    HIV testing
    Health talks with pregnant women and observations of signs of danger
    Issuance of referral letters to other facilities


LEVEL 2 – Health Dispensaries
These facilities are run by clinical officers:
The dispensaries in the cities act like a health centre (see level 3), with the difference that the
dispensary does not have in-patient facilities.
These are some of the services you will expect in a dispensary:
    Outpatient services
    VCT services
    Tuberculosis services
    Laboratory Services
    Well baby Clinics
    Antenatal and Postnatal services
    Pharmacy
    Counselling services
    Curative treatment
    They issue referral letters to other facilities


LEVEL 3 – Health Centres
These are small hospitals with minimal facilities, yet they offer services like the big hospitals.
They are run by at least one doctor, clinical officers and nurses.
These are some of the services they offer:
    Maternity in-patient services with a ward
    Curative services
    Laboratory services
    Dental
    Counselling
                                                                                                13
    Pharmacy
    TB Clinics
    Diabetes & hypertension clinics
    Comprehensive care clinics for patients living with HIV
    Baby well clinics
    Antenatal and postnatal services
    They issue referral letters to other facilities


LEVEL 4 – County Hospitals
    These are hospitals that offer holistic services and are ran by a director who is a medic and at
     best a doctor by profession
    In many counties there’s just one hospital but in larger cities like Nairobi there are two
    They have in principle the same services as the Level 3 hospitals, plus X-Ray services They issue
     referral letters to other facilities


LEVEL 5 – County Referral Hospitals
These are the county referral hospitals formerly the provincial hospitals. They are run by Chief
Executive Officers who are medic by profession and have over 100 beds capacity for their in-
patient. They are also do research about health.
In Nairobi Mama Lucy Hospital and Mbagathi Hospital both double up as county referral
hospitals and Level 4 hospitals.
Services include what other hospitals offer, plus
    Ultrasound
    CT-Scan
    Surgery
    Pharmacy
    Physiotherapy
    Orthopaedics
    Occupational Therapy
    They issue referral letters to other facilities


                                                                                                        14
LEVEL 6 – National Referral Hospitals
In Kenya there are three Teaching and Research referral hospitals: Mathari Hospital, Kenyatta
National Hospital, Moi Teaching and Referral Hospital and the National Spinal Injury Referral
Hospital. Their range of services is the same as of on Level 5, but they offer specialised
treatments to patients and are not only accessed by Kenyans but do serve East Africa and Central
Africa.
 a. Mathari Teaching and Referral Hospital offers specialised mental services.
 b. Kenyatta National Hospital and Moi Teaching and Referral hospital offer specialised
     consultations in curative care.
 c. National Spinal Injury Referral offers specialised services in orthopaedic and spinal injuries.
The national government manages these three hospitals.




Figure 3: Organization of health services in Kenya under a devolved system.

                                                                                                      15
Source: https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Organization-of-health-services-in-Kenya-under-
a-devolved-system_fig5_287964619


  1.4.5 Theatre layout and units
Physical layout


 a. Arrangement.
Basic principles for efficient workflow are adhered to when planning the arrangement of rooms
within a surgical suite. For example, traffic must move smoothly and without interruption into,
through, and out of the suite. Those rooms where support activities are performed are grouped
conveniently and systematically about the ORs, which are arranged in pairs with scrub rooms
and sterilizing facilities between them as shown in Figure 1. Proper arrangement of the rooms
reduces the flow of excess traffic, saves much unnecessary walking, and therefore conserves
time and effort.


 b. Size of the Suite.
Numerous factors are considered when estimating the size of the surgical suite required for a
hospital:


 1. The first of these is the operative load or the number of surgical cases to be done per day. Some
     hospitals have more patients requiring medical care than surgical care. In such a hospital, only a
     small operative section would be necessary. Several operative procedures can be done per day
     in each OR, one case following another, but all should be completed by the end of the usual day
     shift or shortly thereafter.
        i.   The average number of ORs needed is indicated by the number of operative cases to be
             done daily divided by the number of cases that can be done daily in one OR.
       ii.   Operative load can also be broadly interpreted to include the amount of work to be
             done per day, outside of actual cases. There is a great deal of preparatory work
             necessary for each surgical procedure as well as the routine tasks to maintain the suite.
             If most supplies are prepared and sterilized in CMS, the OR suite needs to maintain only
             a small preparation and sterilization area; otherwise, it may need a large one.

                                                                                                     16
 2. The second factor, the types of surgery to be done, is even more specific. Some procedures such
      as cardiac surgery are very long and detailed, requiring many hours of operative time; others,
      such as tonsillectomy, can be accomplished in just 20 to 30 minutes. In the first instance, a single
      OR would be engaged for the whole operative day with just one case; in the second example,
      eight or ten such procedures could be done in the same length of time.
 3. The number and frequency of emergency cases are also considerations related to the necessary
      size of the suite. The larger the troop area near a hospital, the greater the number of accident
      and emergency cases that may have to be done. These must be done immediately, meaning that
      other scheduled cases may have to wait until after normal duty hours, unless provision has been
      made for an additional room.


 c.   Size of Individual Operating Room.
In addition to plans for the number of ORs required, the size of each room must also be
considered. Certain types of surgery require the use of much bulky equipment. This is especially
true of open-heart surgery, during which large machines are required to pump and oxygenate
the blood outside of the body and to monitor the functioning of the heart. Factors such as this
must be planned for and sufficient floor space provided so that breaks in aseptic technique due
to overcrowding will be avoided. On the other hand, rooms should be no larger than necessary,
thus reducing the amount of unnecessary times spent walking. The Army criteria for square
footage per room are sufficiently flexible to provide for the needs of its hospitals as shown in
Figure 1, "Type" floor plan for an Army hospital-operating suite.)


 d. Four Areas.

The designations listed in the Four Zone Concept (1) thru (4) are not necessarily used for all
hospitals, but whenever feasible the surgical suite is segregated into four areas for traffic control.
The purpose of such control is to assure maximum protection against infections. In analyzing
the traffic and commerce system of the OR system, specific traffic patterns must be determined.
These are dependent on the entrances and exits for both personnel and materials. Renovation
planning of existing facilities should consider renovation of central supply and storage areas to
bring these as close to the point of utilization as possible. Where entirely new wings, buildings,
or entire hospital complexes are being considered, there is opportunity to design traffic,

                                                                                                         17
materials-handling, and storage systems around the requirements of the surgical suite. Traffic
control design is aided by designation of the four-zone concept (as shown below): the
interchange area, semirestricted area, restricted area, and dirty area.




                               Figure 4: Medical Theatre layout



Four-zone concept.
 1. Interchange area.
The interchange area is provided to enable persons from outside the surgical suite to meet with
personnel within the suite when necessary. Examples of such rooms are the offices--one for the
OR supervisor and one for the chief of anesthesiology as shown in Figure 1 whenever the offices
for these personnel are situated within the surgical suite. In some hospitals, these offices are
located convenient to but outside the surgical suite in order to keep traffic within the suite to a
minimum. If there is a postanesthesia (recovery) room, it is also classified as an interchange area
although entry is carefully controlled. The main outer corridors are in the interchange area. This
area also consists of the rooms designed for personnel to change from street clothes or military
uniforms into OR attire ("scrub clothing") as shown Figure 1. If space and arrangement permit,
there are two doors to each dressing room--one for the entry of persons in street clothes and the
other for their exit in scrub clothes. The individual lockers are generally equipped with
nametags, locks, and keys. Caps, masks, and scrub clothing are stored in the dressing rooms.
Dressing rooms may be equipped with showers. A mask need not be worn in this area.


                                                                                                18
 2. Semirestricted area.
Comprising the semirestricted area are corridors within the work area, the anesthesia workroom
and storage, the utility closet, the instrument storage room, the workroom, the linen storage
room, the clean linen room, and the soiled linen room as shown in Figure 1. The semirestricted
area then represents the supply center for the surgical suite. Although, non-sterile procedures
are performed in this area, personnel without OR attire are not admitted. A mask need not be
worn in this area.


 3. Restricted area.
The restricted area consists of all rooms in which sterile procedures are done and sterile goods
are opened or exposed. This includes the individual ORs and the adjacent scrub rooms where
soap, nail files, brushes, timers, and written directions are available for the scrub procedure.
Also included are the preanesthesia rooms (induction rooms) if the suite has this facility. On the
floor plan shown in figure 1-3, a part of the "anesthesia area," (4), may be designated for the
induction of anesthesia. If the suite is arranged to include a substerilizing room between each
two ORs, then these rooms are considered to be restricted because supplies are autoclaved here
without being covered and are moved, uncovered, into the OR. Each person working in the
restricted area is required to wear scrub clothes, cap, and mask.


 4. Dirty area. The dirty area is the disposal area, where all utilized materials and linen are gathered,
     packaged, and sent to appropriate areas.


 e. Arrangement of Areas.

There is no one rule that must be followed in the physical arrangement of the four areas
previously discussed. However, the nonrestricted and interchange areas should be located near
the entry door. Workroom areas are situated near the center of the suite, and storage and supply
rooms nearby are positioned to avoid waste in time and energy of personnel. Areas for storage
of both sterile and unsterile supplies must be clearly marked to avoid mistaking one for the other.
If there is no linen chute in the suite, a room for soiled linen is necessary. This room is classified
as semirestricted. If the suite has observation galleries, these are provided with outside entries
to eliminate unnecessary traffic of persons in street clothing.
                                                                                                      19
Figure 5: Theatre layout

Source: https://www.researchgate.net/figure/First-case-modified-OT-layout-
plan_fig2_256457508
                                  51    1.5 Learning Activities
  1.5.1 Practical activity
Field visit:
Conduct a visit to the nearest county health facility and do the following:
 a. Classify it based on level.
 b. Assess the compliance of the layout and draw a sketch.
 c. Draw the organization structure of the facility


  1.5.2 Self-Assessment Questions
Explain four zone concept in theatre layout.
Describe Level 3 health facilities and services offered.
Describe nursing department

                                                                              20
  1.5.3 Answers to Self-Assessment questions


Explain four zone concept in theatre layout.
Four-zone concept.
 1. Interchange area.
The interchange area is provided to enable persons from outside the surgical suite to meet with
personnel within the suite when necessary. Examples of such rooms are the offices--one for the
OR supervisor and one for the chief of anesthesiology as shown in Figure 1 whenever the offices
for these personnel are situated within the surgical suite. In some hospitals, these offices are
located convenient to but outside the surgical suite in order to keep traffic within the suite to a
minimum. If there is a postanesthesia (recovery) room, it is also classified as an interchange area
although entry is carefully controlled. The main outer corridors are in the interchange area. This
area also consists of the rooms designed for personnel to change from street clothes or military
uniforms into OR attire ("scrub clothing") as shown Figure 1. If space and arrangement permit,
there are two doors to each dressing room--one for the entry of persons in street clothes and the
other for their exit in scrub clothes. The individual lockers are generally equipped with
nametags, locks, and keys. Caps, masks, and scrub clothing are stored in the dressing rooms.
Dressing rooms may be equipped with showers. A mask need not be worn in this area.


 2. Semirestricted area.
Comprising the semirestricted area are corridors within the work area, the anesthesia workroom
and storage, the utility closet, the instrument storage room, the workroom, the linen storage
room, the clean linen room, and the soiled linen room as shown in Figure 1. The semirestricted
area then represents the supply center for the surgical suite. Although, non-sterile procedures
are performed in this area, personnel without OR attire are not admitted. A mask need not be
worn in this area.


 3. Restricted area.
The restricted area consists of all rooms in which sterile procedures are done and sterile goods
are opened or exposed. This includes the individual ORs and the adjacent scrub rooms where
soap, nail files, brushes, timers, and written directions are available for the scrub procedure.
                                                                                                21
Also included are the preanesthesia rooms (induction rooms) if the suite has this facility. On the
floor plan shown in figure 1-3, a part of the "anesthesia area," (4), may be designated for the
induction of anesthesia. If the suite is arranged to include a substerilizing room between each
two ORs, then these rooms are considered to be restricted because supplies are autoclaved here
without being covered and are moved, uncovered, into the OR. Each person working in the
restricted area is required to wear scrub clothes, cap, and mask.


 4. Dirty area. The dirty area is the disposal area, where all utilized materials and linen are gathered,
     packaged, and sent to appropriate areas.


Describe Level 3 health facilities and services offered.


LEVEL 3 – Health Centres
These are small hospitals with minimal facilities, yet they offer services like the big hospitals.
They are run by at least one doctor, clinical officers and nurses.
These are some of the services they offer:
    Maternity in-patient services with a ward
    Curative services
    Laboratory services
    Dental
    Counselling
    Pharmacy
    TB Clinics
    Diabetes & hypertension clinics
    Comprehensive care clinics for patients living with HIV
    Baby well clinics
    Antenatal and postnatal services
    They issue referral letters to other facilities


Describe nursing department


                                                                                                      22
  The nursing department is the organizational structure through which nurses provide nursing
  care for clients under the jurisdiction of the institution. The nursing department consists of
  nursing service and nursing education. The primary purpose of the nursing service is to provide
  comprehensive, safe, effective and well-organized nursing care through the personnel of the
  department. The personnel consists of nursing superintendent, assistant nursing superintendents,
  head nurses and staff nurses. All of these are registered nurses, other personnel who function in
  the nursing service department may include the auxiliary personnel nurse aids and domestics
  who handle the non-nursing services.
  The nursing education section has the responsibility of preparing nursing students to become
  professional nurses. Uplifting the standard of nursing by inservice education and refresher
  courses etc., are included in the functions of this department. The personnel consists of principal
  or director of nursing education, the associate professors, assistant professors, tutors and clinical
  instructors.


                     52      1.6 Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials
The following resources are provided:
Tools
       PPEs
            Safety boots

            Goggles

            Dust coats

            First aid kit

            Overalls

       Stationery

       Cupboard drawers

       Internet




                                                                                                    23
                                  53      1.7 References
https://www.canestar.com/list-of-departments-in-hospital-and-its-functions----a-simple-
learning-for-nurses..html 25/02/2021 at 13:34pm
Mwabu, G., Ainsworth, M., & Nyamete, A. (1993). Quality of medical care and choice of
medical treatment in Kenya: an empirical analysis. Journal of Human Resources, 838-862.
https://roggkenya.org/about-this-site-reporting-on-good-governance-and-corruption-in-kenya/




                                                                                          24
54         2.1 Learning Outcome 2: Demonstrate the knowledge of medical equipment in basic
                                                   patient care
                            55      2.2 Introduction to the learning outcome
 This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to demonstrate the
 knowledge of medical equipment in basic patient care. It comprises meaning of terms, types of
 health facility equipment and instruments, functions of health facility equipment and
 instruments, care and maintenance of health facility equipment and instruments, learning
 activities, self-assessment questions and answers, learning activities, tools, equipment, supplies
 and materials and references.


                                    56        2.3. Performance Standard
 2.3.1 Health facility equipment and instruments are identified as per the workplace procedures
 2.3.2 Functions of health facility equipment and instruments are identified as per the
 workplace procedures
 2.3.3 Malfunctioning equipment and instruments are identified and reported as per the
 workplace procedures

                                         57     2.4 Information sheet
         2.4.1 Meaning of terms
          Radiology is the science dealing with X-rays and other high-energy radiation, especially the use
           of such radiation for the diagnosis and treatment of disease.
          Diagnostic is concerned with the diagnosis of illness or other problems.
          Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a medical imaging technique used in radiology to form
           pictures of the anatomy and the physiological processes of the body. MRI scanners use strong
           magnetic fields, magnetic field gradients, and radio waves to generate images of the organs in
           the body.
          Cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) is a technique in which a machine temporarily takes over the
           function of the heart and lungs during surgery, maintaining the circulation of blood and the
           oxygen content of the patient's body.
          A nebulizer is a piece of medical equipment that a person with asthma or another respiratory
           condition can use to administer medication directly and quickly to the lungs. A nebulizer turns



                                                                                                             25
       liquid medicine into a very fine mist that a person can inhale through a face mask or
       mouthpiece.
     2.4.2 Types of health facility equipment/instruments and functions
Diagnostic Equipment
Diagnostic medical equipment is any type of equipment or tools used in a hospital setting for
the sole purpose of diagnosing a patient’s condition. Based on the symptoms described by the
patient, a diagnostic test is performed using the appropriate equipment to evaluate the patient
internally. The doctor or technician is looking for any abnormalities in the affected organs or
parts of the body that are causing the symptoms to be exhibited.
Below are some of the most common types of diagnostic equipment used in laboratories and
medical clinics:
 a. Medical imaging machines – Medical imaging is a type of technology that is used to create visual
       representations of the human body’s interior. The visual image produced by the equipment is
       used for clinical analysis and medical intervention. There are many medical imaging equipment,
       such as radiography (X-ray machine), computed tomography (CT scan), magnetic resonance
       imaging (MRI scan), ultrasound, and echocardiography, to name a few.
 b. Aside from medical imaging machines, there are other medical devices used for diagnosing
       patients. Some examples include patient scales, stethoscopes, dopplers, and pulse oximetry.


Durable Medical Equipment (DME)
This type of medical equipment is used mainly for providing therapeutic benefits for certain
conditions or illnesses. The use of this equipment must be prescribed by a physician, which is
designed to serve a medical purpose. It is a long-term and reusable device that can be used in
the hospital or at home for patient care. There are several types of durable medical equipment
such as the following:
      Manual wheelchairs or electric wheelchairs
      Hospital beds
      Walkers, crutches, canes (or any similar type of mobility assistive equipment)
      Traction equipment
      Pressure mattresses
      Insulin pumps
                                                                                                     26
    Breast pumps
    Nebulizers
    Patient lifts
    Bili lights and blankets
    Kidney machines
    Stationary or portable oxygen tanks
    Oxygen Concentrators Ventilators
The term ‘durable’ is derived from the fact that these types of equipment have been tested for
quality. They are designed to provide support for the safety and comfort of the patients. They
should be able to deliver just that. Some of the common features of durable medical equipment
include non-slip features and load-bearing strength. Since this equipment is prescribed by the
physician for the benefit of the patient, the cost of acquiring one is often covered by health
insurance plans.
Treatment Equipment
Treatment equipment is any type of medical device or tool that is designed to treat a specific
condition. It utilizes modern technology in order to address any abnormalities to restore function
in the affected organs or tissues within the body. This can also include the surgical supplies
designed to provide treatment for certain conditions that require surgical intervention.
Below are common examples of medical treatment equipment that you will find in hospitals and
clinics:
    Infusion Pumps – This type of treatment equipment is used in a hospital setting. It is designed to
     infuse medication, fluids, and other forms of treatment to the patient’s circulatory system. This
     machine is used intravenously but you can also find epidural or arterial infusions. This machine
     is reliable because it injects controlled amounts of fluids into the patient’s system over a given
     period of time.
    LASIK Surgical Machines – The use of LASIK technology is used primarily for the treatment of eye
     conditions. It is designed for use on patients suffering from myopia, hyperopia, or astigmatism.
    Medical Lasers – The laser is a revolutionary technology introduced in the medical field for the
     treatment of various medical conditions. It is a device that emits a wavelength of
     electromagnetic radiation for clinical applications. These wavelengths vary when it comes to


                                                                                                      27
     energy level and pulse duration. These settings are to be determined by the attending physician
     during treatment.
Meanwhile, treatment equipment used for surgical procedures include the following:
    Diagnostic scopes
    Surgical caps, gowns, gloves, or glasses (for the surgical team)
    Gauze and drapes (for patients)
Life Support Equipment
As the name implies, life support equipment are those medical devices intended to maintain the
bodily function of a patient. Without life support, it will be difficult for the patient’s organ
systems to function on their own. There are a variety of life support machines in the medical
field today, such as the following:
    Heart-lung Machines – Also known as cardiopulmonary bypass (CB) devices, this type of
     equipment temporarily functions as the heart or lungs of a patient during surgery. It facilitates in
     the circulation of blood and oxygen throughout the patient’s body. It is known as a form of
     extracorporeal circulation.
    Medical Ventilators – This type of device is designed to move breathable air in and out of the
     lungs. It is used on patients who have difficulty breathing, or who are incapable of delivering an
     adequate supply of oxygen throughout the body. There are two types of medical ventilators.
     One is hand-operated using a bag valve mask. The other is run and operated by a computer. You
     will find this machine used in intensive care unit patients or home care patients.
    Dialysis Machine – Dialysis is the method of removing excess solutes or toxins from the blood. It
     is used on people whose kidneys have been damaged and are incapable of performing these
     functions. It is a type of renal replacement therapy. Dialysis machines are essential for those
     who have kidney damage or lost kidney function.
    Incubators – An incubator is a medical apparatus used for neonatal intensive care. It is designed
     to mimic the environmental conditions suitable for newborn babies. It is often used in
     conjunction with a few other medical equipment such as an oxygen hood and ventilator.
Medical Laboratory Equipment
The use of medical laboratory equipment is often seen in medical clinics or diagnostic
laboratories. These types of equipment are intended for the analysis of blood, urine, genes, and


                                                                                                       28
other biological material. Below are the most common examples of medical laboratory
equipment used in the medical field:
    Blood gas analyzers
    Chemistry analyzers
    Blood collection supplies
    Electrolyte analyzers
    Differential counters
    Drug testing analyzers
    Coagulation analyzers
    Hematology analyzers
    Urinalysis analyzers
    Microbiological systems
As medical technology continues to develop, you can expect that there will be more types of
medical equipment emerging. This is good news to patients who can expect quality medical care
and diagnosis utilizing the latest in medical technology.


Ceiling Mounted Equipment


Expect a Surgical and an Anaesthetic Pendant in any theatre which have power, data and various
gas outlets. There are several major suppliers on the market with numerous different types.
Pendants can be rigid, rigid-retractable or fully articulated. Theatres require fully articulated
pendants for maximum flexibility. A lot of co-ordination is required between medical gas,
electrical, and pendant trade contractors together with electrical, mechanical and structural
engineers/consultants while installing pendants to ensure all structural steel support is in place,
gas pipes are properly connected and power and data cables run at the correct programmed dates.
Various life saving equipment must be powered off Isolated Power Supply (IPS) which is also
backed up by Un-interruptible Power Supply (UPS), in case of power failure during surgery.


 1. Theatre Lights
There used to be the Gas Discharge lights or Halogen lights. Aspects to consider were bulb life,
costs associated and Theatre down time while bulbs were changed.
                                                                                                29
There is a new kid on the block in the last few years – LED technology. About 30% more
expensive compared to the existing technology but very long life bulbs (over 20,000 hours),
ease of maintenance (couple of minutes to replace an LED), cheap cost of replacement (fraction
of older technology) and ability to vary light temperature hence helping to diagnose cancerous
cells etc. Theatre Lights must be backed up by a battery back up in case of power failure during
surgery. Suggested time can be 3 hours back up. Note that general lighting and emergency
escape lighting should also be on similar battery/UPS back up time. The battery backup unit can
be a large wall mounted cabinet about 1m x 1m and about 300-400mm deep. It will need to be
mounted not far from the Theatre Lights but not inside the clinical space.


 2. Camera
In a teaching facility, a camera (now a days High Definition Camera) and microphone is also
required for one way video (from Operating Theatre to Lecture Theatre and/or Seminar Rooms)
and two-way audio for surgeons and students to communicate. The camera can either be
installed in the handle of the main Theatre Light of installed on a separate ceiling mounted arm.
Consider all implications for power and data transfer (HD requires much higher bit rate transfer).
Consider a wireless Reality TV/Big Brother style microphone on the surgeon to allow freedom
of movement.
In Orthopaedic Theatres you would need to consider the largest ceiling mounted item – The
Laminar Flow or the Ultra Clean Ventilation (UCV) Canopy. This item will need a separate
article as we are planning a general Theatre in this article.


Wall Mounted Equipment
 1. Surgeons Panel
The panels can the older style steel type or the more current Membrane Type panels which allow
ease of cleaning/disinfection. The membrane can be made anti-microbial by inclusion of silver
nitrate. A newer version of panels can be touch screen which is now proving very popular taking
over the mechanical switch panels and allows a lot of functionality simply by programming as
the Theatre changes over time and new items are added and old removed.
For ease of cleaning and aesthetics, the panels should be flush mounted.


                                                                                               30
Note that all the pendants, theatre lights, general lights, gas alarm panel, IPS/UPS, and warning
signs for X-Ray in-use / Laser in-use signs outside Theatre, air sampling ducts, clocks etc need
considered and carefully co-ordinated among the trade contractors and design consultants for
services and wiring.


Floor Mounted Equipment
 a. Theatre Table
Generally these are rechargeable and don’t necessarily require power socket close by.
 b. Trolleys
Trolleys are used for instruments and equipment such as video endoscopes and anaesthetic
equipment.
We mentioned ease of cleaning at the start. To enable this the walls should have special plastic
enamel paint to allow chemical cleaning if required in case of disinfection. The ceiling is
generally constructed of plaster board or special metal to ensure it is air-tight and easily cleaned.
Airflow regime is an important part of moving the air from clean areas towards dirty and out of
the Operating Theatre suite to ensure the Theatre is the most clean environment for operating
on the patients.
I trust the above has given you some basics to consider when planning your next operating
theatre.


     2.4.3 Care and maintenance of health facility equipment and instruments


Most commonly used electric equipments in the hospitals are:
      Computers                                            Ultrasound
      Refrigerators                                        CT & MRI machines
      Cardiac monitors                                     Ventilator
      Pulse oxymeter                                       Defibrillator
      Suction apparatus
      Nebulizer
      Syringe pump
      Glucometer
                                                                                                  31
Proper care and maintenance is very important for proper functioning of equipment.

Medical Equipment Care and Maintenance Tips
There's just no getting around the fact that medical equipment is expensive. Even if you
manage to find gently used equipment that is in good condition and current enough to
benefit your practice, you'll probably still shell out some dough for it. So you want to
make sure it lasts as long as possible.
This requires you to practice proper care and maintenance, especially for the equipment
you tend to use day in and day out. You need it to work properly so that you can offer
your patients the best possible care. If it breaks down, not only are you left trying to
figure out how to treat patients on the fly, but it doesn't exactly make your practice look
reliable.
Even with proper maintenance and repair, you can't always control equipment failures,
but your best bet to keep these pricy machines in good working order is consistent care.
Here are a few maintenance and care tips to get you started.


 1. Proper Usage
Maintaining your medical equipment starts with the way you treat it every day, including
how you use it. Smacking your old tube TV may have improved reception, but it's
definitely not going to make your sensitive equipment work better or faster.
Okay, so you're probably not going to hit your machinery, but if you're using it
improperly, you might as well. Your mantra should be "use only as directed", and with
most machinery, you'll have plenty of in-depth instructions to peruse. If you're not sure
about proper usage, take the time to call customer support with any questions.
When you use equipment in a way that is not recommended, you not only risk harming
the machinery (and possibly patients), but you may open yourself up to liability. In other
words, it's important to practice proper usage.


 2. Follow Manufacturer Guidelines
Manufacturers not only provide instructions related to how to properly use equipment,
but also how to maintain it. Whether you're supposed to run regular diagnostics and
updates to firmware and software or you're advised to hire professional technicians for
regular inspection and maintenance, it's always best to follow manufacturer guidelines
concerning maintenance.
This will give you the best opportunity to ensure proper function and longevity, as well
as help you to avoid potentially costly snafus should machinery fail.


 3. In-house Maintenance
There are certain maintenance and repair tasks for which your staff probably isn't
qualified. However, you may find that you, your office personnel, or in-house support
services (if you're in a hospital setting) can handle some of the basic maintenance tasks.
This could not only allow you some measure of immediate response should equipment
suffer problems, reducing downtime, but it can also help to reduce the expense associated
with ongoing equipment maintenance costs.
You just have to be aware of what you (or your support staff) are capable of handling so
that you know when it's necessary to bring in professional help.


 4. Hire Qualified Technicians
At the very least, you should have equipment serviced regularly by qualified technicians.
Just like you hire an HVAC technician to inspect, clean, and maintain your home HVAC
system annually and you take your car to the mechanic every three months or 3,000
miles, you should bring in the pros to maintain your medical equipment regularly.
You do have some options for service contracts, though. You could, for example, use
OEM (original equipment manufacturer) technicians. These specialists are likely to be
the costliest, but also the most qualified to maintain and repair equipment.
Another option is to hire third-party vendors. The upside here is that you'll likely pay a
little less and technicians may be able to service a variety of equipment instead of just
one brand or category. The potential drawback is that this vendor could be a Jack of all
trades and a master of none, so to speak.


                                                                                         ii
A final option is remote assistance. If you have an issue that requires immediate
attention, customer support may be able to talk you through needed repairs or even
access equipment that has internet connection capabilities in order to diagnose and fix
problems.


 5. Understand Warranties
Although proper usage, care, and maintenance should help to keep your equipment
running properly for a good long while, problems can still occur. If this happens, you
need to know how your warranty works so that you can receive compensation of some
sort. Often, a failure to complete recommended maintenance could void your warranty.


General Principles of Care:
 1. All objects to be disinfected or sterilized should first be thoroughly cleaned to remove all
     organic matter (blood and tissue) and other residue.
 2. All items used in patient care shall be kept clean and in proper working condition.
 3. All medical instruments and other items used for patient care must be cleaned and
     disinfected or sterilized before use on another patient.
 4. Excessive moisture on electrical components can cause damage to certain instruments.
     Disinfectants and cleaners sprayed directly onto electrical devices may cause them to
     short circuit. This can also happen with excessively wet cleaning cloths.
 5. Refer to the manufacturer’s instructions for use of the appropriate type of disinfectant
     and the best method of cleaning and sterilizing each piece of medical instrumentation
 6. Ethyl or isopropyl alcohol (70%-90%) is used for chemical disinfection.
 7. For routine cleaning of most of the items, a ammonium germicidal detergent is
     available.
 8. Cleaning and decontamination should begin as soon as possible after use as blood and
     body fluids can cause pitting of instruments and if left to dry can be difficult to remove.
 9. When transport to the decontamination area is going to be delayed, soiled instruments
     should be moistened with a wet towel or enzymatic solution. 10. Decontamination and
     packaging should not be performed in patient care areas.



                                                                                               iii
 10. Perform periodic calibration of the equipment and the equipments that are faulty
     should be sent to the Bio-medical Engineering Department.
 11. Clean properly
        To prevent bacteria growth, the equipment should be inspected before each use
         and cleaned as often as necessary.
        Use rubbing alcohol and a soft cloth or gauze pads to clean the equipment. If
         needed, dry the equipment with a clean paper towel and throw the towel away.
        Also clean the equipment after each use to prevent buildup of debris.
 12. Disinfect after each use
        Besides keeping it clean, another important aspect of medical equipment
         maintenance is disinfecting after each use.
        There are different disinfecting procedures depending on the equipment you are
         using. Check with your manufacturer or distributor for more information
 13. Storage
        Medical equipment should be stored in a clean and dry location so that it is not
         exposed to dust, direct sunlight, moisture, extreme temperatures or other
         potentially hazardous forces.
        Even when not in use medical equipment can deteriorate over time, make sure that
         you are regularly inspecting it. If you notice any damaged or defective parts, stop
         using the equipment and repair or replace the equipment
        Many types of medical equipment need to be serviced by qualified technicians at
         regular intervals. Make sure you are aware of this schedule


                             58     2.5 Learning Activities
  2.5.1 Practical activity
Care and maintenance of a refrigerator.
You are provided with a refrigerator that has been in operation for one and half years
without maintenance. Plan and execute its maintenance following the required
principles.




                                                                                               iv
       2.5.2 Self-Assessment Questions
   1. Enumerate most common examples of medical laboratory equipment used in the
         medical field.
   2. Explain uses of medical imaging machines
   3. List general principles of care for medical machines and equipment


       2.5.3 Answers to Self-Assessment questions
  1. Enumerate most common examples of medical laboratory equipment used in the
  medical field.
        Blood gas analyzers
        Chemistry analyzers
        Blood collection supplies
        Electrolyte analyzers
        Differential counters
        Drug testing analyzers
        Coagulation analyzers
        Hematology analyzers
        Urinalysis analyzers
        Microbiological systems


2. Explain uses of medical imaging machines
  Medical imaging machines – Medical imaging is a type of technology that is used to
  create visual representation of the human body’s interior. The visual image produced by
  the equipment is used for clinical analysis and medical intervention. There are many
  medical imaging equipment, such as radiography (X-ray machine), computed
  tomography (CT scan), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI scan), ultrasound, and
  echocardiography, to name a few.


3. List general principles of care for medical machines and equipment
   1. All objects to be disinfected or sterilized should first be thoroughly cleaned to remove all
         organic matter (blood and tissue) and other residue.
                                                                                                v
2. All items used in patient care shall be kept clean and in proper working condition.
3. All medical instruments and other items used for patient care must be cleaned and
    disinfected or sterilized before use on another patient.
4. Excessive moisture on electrical components can cause damage to certain instruments.
    Disinfectants and cleaners sprayed directly onto electrical devices may cause them to
    short circuit. This can also happen with excessively wet cleaning cloths.
5. Refer to the manufacturer’s instructions for use of the appropriate type of disinfectant
    and the best method of cleaning and sterilizing each piece of medical instrumentation
6. Ethyl or isopropyl alcohol (70%-90%) is used for chemical disinfection.
7. For routine cleaning of most of the items, a ammonium germicidal detergent is
    available.
8. Cleaning and decontamination should begin as soon as possible after use as blood and
    body fluids can cause pitting of instruments and if left to dry can be difficult to remove.
9. When transport to the decontamination area is going to be delayed, soiled instruments
    should be moistened with a wet towel or enzymatic solution. 10. Decontamination and
    packaging should not be performed in patient care areas.
10. Perform periodic calibration of the equipment and the equipments that are faulty
    should be sent to the Bio-medical Engineering Department.
11. Clean properly
       To prevent bacteria growth, the equipment should be inspected before each use
        and cleaned as often as necessary.
       Use rubbing alcohol and a soft cloth or gauze pads to clean the equipment. If
        needed, dry the equipment with a clean paper towel and throw the towel away.
       Also clean the equipment after each use to prevent buildup of debris.
12. Disinfect after each use
       Besides keeping it clean, another important aspect of medical equipment
        maintenance is disinfecting after each use.
       There are different disinfecting procedures depending on the equipment you are
        using. Check with your manufacturer or distributor for more information
13. Storage



                                                                                              vi
           Medical equipment should be stored in a clean and dry location so that it is not
            exposed to dust, direct sunlight, moisture, extreme temperatures or other
            potentially hazardous forces.
           Even when not in use medical equipment can deteriorate over time, make sure that
            you are regularly inspecting it. If you notice any damaged or defective parts, stop
            using the equipment and repair or replace the equipment
           Many types of medical equipment need to be serviced by qualified technicians at
            regular intervals. Make sure you are aware of this schedule




                  59      2.6 Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials
The following resources are provided:
Tools
       PPEs
            a. Safety boots

            b. Goggles

            c. Dust coats

            d. First aid kit

            e. Overalls



       Health facility
       Manufacturers’ machine operating manuals for all laboratory equipment.
       Supplier’s equipment warranty cards.
       Date of equipment purchase
       Running tap water
       Calibration reports
       Equipment maintenance schedules
       Laboratory practice manuals

                                                                                                  vii
    Stationery

    Cupboard drawers

    Internet



                              60      2.7 References
Kanyangarara, M., Munos, M. K., & Walker, N. (2017). Quality of antenatal care service
provision in health facilities across sub–Saharan Africa: Evidence from nationally
representative health facility assessments. Journal of global health, 7(2).
Ziraba, A. K., Mills, S., Madise, N., Saliku, T., & Fotso, J. C. (2009). The state of
emergency obstetric care services in Nairobi informal settlements and environs: results
from a maternity health facility survey. BMC health services research, 9(1), 1-8.




                                                                                    viii
CHAPTER 3


CHAPTER 3 COMMON DISEASES




                            ix
                              Background Information
 This learning guide will enable the trainee to acquire competencies that a person must
 achieve to enable him/her to effectively discharge POTT LEVEL 6 works and
 contributes towards meeting health needs and requirements.
 This learning guide will enable the trainee to also acquire competencies in identifying
 the stages of disease development, demonstrating the knowledge of communicable
 diseases, non-communicable diseases and management of common diseases
 Layout of the Trainee Guide
 Performance standards: These are obtained from the performance criteria statements
 in the related unit of competency of the Occupational Standards (OS)
 Information Sheet: This section covers information relating to the specific learning
 outcome. This information should include but not limited to meaning of terms, methods,
 processes/ procedures/ guidelines, Illustrations (photographs, pictures, videos, charts,
 plans, digital content links, simulations links) and case studies. This section also
 provides additional information sources relevant to the learning outcome e.g. books,
 web links
 Learning activities: This section covers practical activitiesrelated to the Performance
 Criteria statements, Knowledge in relation to Performance Criteria as given under
 content in the curriculum and any Special instructions related to learning activities
Self-Assessment: This section must be related to the Performance Criteria, Required
Knowledge and Skills in the Occupational Standards. This section requires the trainee to
evaluate their acquisition of skills, knowledge and attitude in relation to the learning
outcome. A variety of assessment items such as written and practical tests which
emphasizes on the application of knowledge, skills and attitude is recommended
The self-assessment items should be valid, relevant and comprehensive to the level of
qualification in the learning outcome
Tools, equipment, materials and supplies: This section should provide for the
requirements of the learning outcome in terms of tools, equipment, supplies and materials.
The section should be adequate, relevant and comprehensive for the learning outcome.
References: Information sources should be quoted and presented as required in the APA
format.

                                                                                         x
                              CHAPTER THREE:
                             COMMON DISEASES
  Unit of learning code: HE/CU/TT/CC/03/6/A
  Related Unit of Competency in Occupational Standard: DEMONSTRATE
  KNOWLEDGE OF COMMON DISEASES
                         1.1 Introduction to the unit of learning
  This unit specifies the competencies required to demonstrate the knowledge of common
  diseases. It involves identifying the stages of disease development, demonstrating the
  knowledge of communicable diseases, non-communicable diseases and management of
  common diseases
                         1.2 Summary of Learning Outcomes
   1. Identify the stages of disease development
   2. Demonstrate the knowledge of communicable diseases
   3. Demonstrate the knowledge of non-communicable diseases
   4. Demonstrate the knowledge on management of common diseases
                             61      1.2.0 Learning outcome
                 62     1.2.1 Identify the stages of disease development
     1.2.1.1 Introduction to the learning outcome
   This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to identify the
   stages of disease development. It includes Meaning of terms, Types of diseases, Natural
   history of a disease and Stages of disease development
    1.2.1.2 Performance Standard

1. 1Common diseases are identified as per WHO epidemiological patterns
1. 2Common diseases are classified as per WHO classification guidelines
  1.3 Natural history of common diseases is identified as per WHO guidelines

    1.2.1.3 Information Sheet

    1.2.1 .3.1 Definitions of terms
     i. Endemic: The persistent presence of a disease within a geographical area in
         low to moderate levels not enough to deplete the pool of susceptible persons.
     ii. Hyperendemic: Persistently high level of occurrence of a disease.
    iii. Sporadic: An irregular pattern of occurrence of with occasional cases occurring
         at irregular intervals.

                                                                                         xi
  iv. Epidemic/ outbreak: The occurrence of a disease within an area which is
       clearly in excess of the expected level for a given time period.
   v. public health practioners prefer the term outbreak because it is less
       alarming/provocative.
  vi. Pandemic: An epidemic that is spread over several countries or continents and
       affects large numbers of people.
 vii. Acute:       Develops rapidly and runs its course quickly e.g. measles and
       influenza
 viii. Chronic: Develops slowly and less severe because a weakened but viable
       organism is responsible. It persists for long indeterminate period of time e.g. TB
       and Leprosy.
  ix. Latent:       Characterized by periods that is free from symptoms and signs. No
       active multiplication of agent is taking place e.g. syphilis.


   x. Localized:       Confined to specific area e.g. boils.
  xi. Systemic/Generalized: Affecting the entire body with pathogens widely
       distributed in many tissues e.g. septicaemia (growth of bacteria throughout the
       circulatory system).
 xii. Inapparent/subclinical: Not producing symptoms in the host at a particular
       time.
 xiii. Symptoms:       Disease characteristics observed or felt by the patient only
 xiv. Sign: Disease characteristic observed by examining through visual appreciation
       or using an instrument.
  xv. Syndrome: A combination of signs and symptoms occurring together in an
       illness. Syndrome can be used in absence of clinical test to diagnose disease and
       institute appropriate action.
 xvi. Sequelae:       After effects left by certain diseases e.g. paralysis after infection
       with polio virus.
   1.2.1.3.2 Types of diseases
Communicable, or infectious diseases, are caused by microorganisms such as bacteria,
viruses, parasites and fungi that can be spread, directly or indirectly, from one person to

                                                                                              xii
another. Some are transmitted through bites from insects while others are caused by
ingesting contaminated food or water.
A variety of disease-producing bacteria and viruses are carried in the mouth, nose, throat
and respiratory tract. Conditions such as leprosy, tuberculosis (TB) and different strains
of influenza (flu) can be spread by coughing, sneezing, and saliva or mucus on unwashed
hands.
Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) such as HIV and viral hepatitis are spread through
the exposure to infective bodily fluids such as blood, vaginal secretions and semen.
Hepatitis is a significant concern in the African Region and the majority of people living
with hepatitis B and C are unaware of their infections.
Insects play a significant role in the transmission of disease. Bites
from Anopheles mosquitoes transmits malaria parasites that can wreak havoc on high-
risk populations such as children under age 5 and pregnant women. Yellow fever has
also seen resurgence due to reduced vaccination efforts. Many neglected tropical
diseases are caused by unsafe water, poor housing conditions and poor sanitation in the
Region.


  1.2.1 .3.3 List of Communicable Diseases
The diseases below are among them.

    2019-nCoV
    Ebola
    Flu
    Hepatitis A
    Hepatitis B
    HIV/AIDS
    Measles
    Pertussis
    Rabies
    Sexually Transmitted Disease
    Shigellosis
    Tuberculosis
    West Nile Virus
    Zika



  1.2.1.3.4 Natural history of a disease:




                                                                                       xiii
            Refers to the progress of a disease process in an individual without intervention
                  over time including complications, symptoms change, remissions, disability cure
                  recovery and death.
            The process begins with exposure to or accumulation of factors capable of causing
                  disease in a susceptible host.
            Most diseases have a characteristic natural history although the time frame and the
                  specific manifestations of the disease vary from person to person.
              1.2.1.3.5 Stages in the natural history of a disease:




                          Prodromal stage           Clinical stage   Declining stage
                                                                                       Convalescent
         Incubation

         period                                                                        stage




                                                                                                      Recovery




                                            Period in which illness is
                                              apparent



Latent period            Period of commu-
nicability                      Carrier

            1.2.1.3.6 Incubation Period:
            Pathogen has embedded in the body of a susceptible host.
            No signs and symptoms are apparent.


                                                                                                                 xiv
  Micro-organisms have invaded the host and are migrating to various tissues causing
     some pathological changes.
  The pathogens have not increased to sufficient numbers to produce enough toxins
     to produce discomfort nor cause the individual to be infective.
  The period is usually variable in length and usually disease specific.


  1.2.1.3.7 Prodromal stage:
  First symptoms of the disease appear.
  Patient is aware of discomfort but no precise signs/symptoms to permit diagnosis
  Patient highly contagious to others.
  Host immune responses become operative.
  Marks transition from sub-clinical to clinical disease.
  1.2.1.3.8 Clinical stage:
  Period of illness
  Characteristic disease symptoms occur.
  Most diagnoses are made during this stage.
  During the acute stage of this period, the patient is sufficiently ill to alter work/
    school activities.
  In some people the disease process may never progress to clinically apparent
    illness.
  In others the disease process may result in a wide spectrum of clinical illness,
    ranging from mild to severe or fatal.
  Chemotherapeutic intervention or adequate immune response may lead to recovery.
  1.2.1.3.9 Decline stage:
  Period of decline if disease is not fatal
  First sign of recovery manifests i.e. disappearance of signs and symptoms.
  Disease starts to end.
  Disease becomes latent or intermittently recurs.
  1.2.1.3.10 Convalescent stage:
  Disease ends
  Progresses to carrier stage or freedom from pathogen.
  Body’s defense may provide lifelong immunity.
  1.2.1.3.11 Full recovery:
  Marks the end of disease syndrome and return to full health.
       63     1.2.2 Demonstrate the knowledge of communicable diseases

  1.2.2.1 INTRODUCTION COMMUNICABLE DISEASES
A disease that is passed from one person to another person is called a communicable or
transmissible disease.    Transmissible diseases include: measles, HIV infection,
tuberculosis, chickenpox, gonorrhoea, scabies, malaria, cholera, and roundworms among

                                                                                     xv
others. Communicable diseases are among the most important diseases in this country.
They are important because:
  Many of them are common
  Some of them are very serious and cause death and disability
  Some of them cause widespread outbreaks of disease – epidemics
  Most of them can be prevented by fairly simple means
In this section you will cover disease patterns in the community, the meaning of host and
infection, as well as the transmission cycle of communicable diseases.
  1.2.2.1.1 Patterns of Communicable Diseases in the Community
Different diseases are common in different places and at different times. To understand
why this happens, you need to consider the disease causative organisms (the agents); the
people they infect (the hosts); and the surroundings in which they live (the environment).
A delicate balance exists between the agent, the host and the environment and it can
change in different ways. For instance, the agent needs a suitable environment in which
to grow and multiply and thus be able to spread and infect other hosts. If the environment
does not support the agent it dies or transforms to a dormant state.
The host (person) is also affected by the environment. For example, a person may live
in a hot, wet climate where there are many mosquitoes. However they can change this
environment by draining swamps, clearing the vegetation and adding competing hosts
such as animals. If the balance is shifted against the agent, the disease will be controlled
and the number of cases will go down.




                                                                                         xvi
  1.2.2.1.2 EPIDEMIOLOGIC TRIANGLE




When the balance between the agent, the host and the environment is fairly constant, you
tend to see approximately the same number of cases of the disease every month. When
this happens the disease is said to be endemic. When the balance is shifted in favour of
the agent (organism), for example, when many non immune children have been born in
an area since the last measles epidemic, a large number of cases of measles may occur
in a short time. This is called an epidemic. Epidemic diseases occur during certain
periods or seasons and cause sudden deaths and much suffering in the community.
An endemic disease can be termed as that which occurs in a given population at a
constant rate over a period of several years. An epidemic disease is that which occurs in
a population at a higher rate than is usually the normal for that population over a given
time interval.




                                                                                     xvii
Diagrammatically the endemic and epidemic disease patterns can be illustrated as
follows:-




  1.2.2.1.3 Some Common Epidemic Diseases in Kenya
  Cholera
  Typhoid fever
  Highland malaria
  Acute bacterial meningitis
In Kenya, malaria is endemic in the lowlands, such as the Tana River basin, the coastal
strip, and the Lake Victoria region. Schistosomiasis which is related to water use is
endemic around the Lake Victoria region and the Mwea irrigation scheme.
Leishmaniasis is endemic in Baringo, along Tana River, and along the River Athi in
Machakos.
In some parts of the country, some disease outbreaks occur only occasionally without a
regular pattern. Such diseases are said to be sporadic in their occurrence.
  1.2.2.1.4 The Host and Infection
At this stage, infection does not produce clear signs and symptoms. The host's immune
system is trying to fight off the agent. In some cases, the organism is overcome by the
host immune cells hence no signs and symptoms are felt and the infection process is
terminated.



                                                                                   xviii
  1.2.2.1.5 Clinical Infection
This is the period when the host develops detectable symptoms and signs of an illness.
At this time the agent has multiplied within the host overcoming the host's immune
system and has started causing abnormal functioning of some body cells and tissues.
This produces overt signs and symptoms of the disease.
It is important for you to understand these stages because people with symptoms are
easier to identify as they come to your health facilities for treatment. People with sub-
clinical infections do not always know they are infected and hence are a danger to other
people. They are also difficult to detect in the general population without special tests.
An individual who is suffering from a sub-clinical infection is also likely to infect others,
as in the case of HIV infection which leads to AIDS after a long period.
They are therefore known as carriers. An individual who develops a clinical or sub-
clinical infection is said to be susceptible to the disease. A susceptible individual is one
whose body lacks resistance to the disease. Resistance of the body to a disease occurs
due to various immunity mechanisms.

  1.2.2.1.6 Modes of transmission of communicable diseases
  Direct contact, for example sexual contact, contact with skin or mucous membranes
  Vectors
  Faecal-oral (ingesting contaminated food and water)
  Airborne
  Tran placental (mother to foetus)
  Blood contact (transfusion, surgery, injection)
  Contact with animals or their products

  1.2.2.1.7 The Disease Transmission Cycle
A disease transmission cycle is a series of steps that a disease-causing organism
undergoes in its disease-causing process. Disease-causing organisms are living things
that need somewhere to live and reproduce. This may be within inanimate or animate
environment (example in rodents, insect, or the human body), which is known as the
reservoir of infection. The human being is the main reservoir of most of the
communicable diseases that affect humanity.
When an infection spreads to a new host, the place, animal or human from which the
organism came from is called the source of the infection. The way in which an organism
leaves the source (the infected host) and passes to a new susceptible host is called the
                                                                                          xix
route of transmission. Each disease-causing organism has particular routes which play a
large part in how these organisms spread in the community.
For example, some organisms are spread through water and food, while others are spread
by vectors like mosquitoes and snails. The diagram below illustrates the differences
between the disease transmission cycle in measles, and in malaria where the causative
organism passes from human being to mosquito and back to the human being.




Every transmission cycle is made up of three parts:-

1.2.2.1.7.1 The Source
This is where the disease-causing organisms spread from. It could be an infected person,
animal, place, or object. The reservoir is the source of infection.

1.2.2.1.7.2 Transmission Route

The main routes of transmission are:
 o Direct contact, for example sexual contact, contact with skin or mucous membranes
 o Vectors
 o Faecal-oral (ingesting contaminated food and water)
 o Airborne
 o Tran placental (mother to foetus)
 o Blood contact (transfusion, surgery, injection)
 o Contact with animals or their products

1.2.2.1.7.3 Susceptible Host
An individual who has low resistance to a particular disease is said to be a susceptible
host for that disease. There are a number of factors which lower the body's resistance to
a disease:
  Not having come in contact with the disease-causing organisms before and
     therefore not having any immunity to it. For example, passive immunity against

                                                                                       xx
   measles is lost at the age of 6 - 12 months. Therefore if a child comes into contact
   with the measles virus after this age, they may develop the disease.
  Having a serious illness like AIDS which suppresses a person’s immunity. People
   with AIDS have a high risk of developing tuberculosis.
  Malnutrition
  Certain drugs such as those used to treat cancer can lower a person’s resistance to
   disease.


    64      1.2.3 Demonstrate the knowledge of non-communicable diseases
  1.2.3.1 Meaning of terms
  1.2.3.1.1 What is a Non-Communicable Disease?
▶ A non-communicable disease are diseases that cannot be spread from person to
person.
▶ Some non-communicable diseases are chronic.
Chronic means that it is present either continuously or on and off over a long period.
▶ Multiple Sclerosis is an example of a degenerative disease.
Degenerative disease is a disease that causes breakdown in body cells, tissues, and
organs as it progresses
   1.2.3.1.2 Diseases Present at Birth
▶Some congenital diseases are caused by heredity, while others are caused by a mother’s
choice of lifestyle while pregnant.
▶ Congenital Disorders are all disorders that are present when the baby is born
▶ Heredity is the passing of traits from parents to their children.
▶ Examples of traits that can be passed from parents to their children are: eye color,
sickle cell anemia, etc.
   1.2.3.2 Risk factors of non-communicable diseases
   1.2.3.2.1 Lifestyle choices and Disease
✕ Factors that You Cannot Control:
a) Heredity
b) Age
c) Gender
d) Ethnic Group
   1.2.3.2.2 Lifestyle choices and Disease
✕ Factors that you Can Control:
i. Eat healthy food
ii. Stay physically active
iii. Maintain a healthy weight
                                                                                         xxi
iv. Get enough sleep
v. Manage stress
vi. Avoid tobacco, alcohol and other drugs
  1.2.3.2.3 Environmental Factors and Disease
▶ Many substances in the environment can cause serious health problems (ex. lead in
fish)
▶ Carbon Monoxide in high levels can cause illness and death
▶ Smog can cause respiratory / breathing problems in some people

   1.2.3.2.4 Common Non-Communicable Diseases
Some no communicable diseases are more common than others. The four main types of
no communicable diseases include cardiovascular disease, cancer, chronic respiratory
disease, and diabetes.


1.2.3.2.4 .1 Cardiovascular disease


Poor diet and physical inactivity can cause increased:


       blood pressure

       blood glucose

       blood lipids

       obesity


These conditions increase the risk of developing cardiovascular disease. Some people
are born with (genetically predisposed to have) certain cardiovascular conditions.


Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of noncommunicable disease deaths. Some
common noncommunicable cardiovascular conditions and diseases include:


       heart attack

       stroke

       coronary artery disease
                                                                                     xxii
    cerebrovascular disease

    peripheral artery disease (PAD)

    congenital heart disease

    deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism

1.2.3.2.4 .2 Cancer


Cancer affects people of all ages, socioeconomic statuses, genders, and ethnicities. It’s
the second most-common cause of noncommunicable disease death globally.


Some cancers cannot be avoided due to genetic risks. However, the World Health
Organization estimates that of cancers are preventable with adoption of healthy lifestyle
choices.


Key steps in preventing disease include:


    avoiding tobacco

    limiting alcohol

    getting immunized against cancer-causing infections


The most common cancer deaths in men worldwide include:


    lung

    liver

    stomach

    colorectal

    prostate


The most common cancer deaths in women worldwide include:


                                                                                     xxiii
      breast
      lung
      colorectal
      cervical
      stomach
1.2.3.2.4 .3 Chronic respiratory disease


Chronic respiratory diseases are ailments affecting the airways and lung structures. Some
of these diseases have a genetic basis. However, other causes include lifestyle choices
such as smoking and environmental conditions like exposure to air pollution, poor air
quality, and poor ventilation. While these diseases are incurable, they can be managed
with medical treatment. The most common chronic respiratory diseases include:

    chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)

    asthma

    occupational lung diseases, such as black lung

    pulmonary hypertension

    cystic fibrosis

1.2.3.2.4 .4 Diabetes


Diabetes occurs when the body cannot produce enough insulin, a hormone that regulates
blood sugar (glucose). It can also occur when the body cannot effectively use the insulin
it produces.Some effects of diabetes include heart disease, vision loss, and kidney injury.
If blood sugar levels are not controlled, diabetes can seriously damage other organs and
systems in the body over time.There are two main types of diabetes:

    Type 1 diabetes is often diagnosed during childhood or young adulthood. It’s the
     result of an immune system dysfunction.

    Type 2 diabetes is often acquired during later adulthood. It’s typically the result of
     poor diet, inactivity, obesity, and other lifestyle and environmental factors.

                                                                                       xxiv
Other types of diabetes include:


     gestational diabetes, which causes elevated blood sugar in 3 to 8 percent of
      pregnant women in the United States

     prediabetes, a condition defined by higher-than-normal blood sugar levels that
      lead to a very high risk of developing type 2 diabetes in the near future


65      1.2.4 Demonstrate the knowledge on management of common
                                       diseases
     1.2.4.1 PRINCIPLES        (METHODS)         OF    COMMUNICABLE               DISEASE
     CONTROL

  1.2.4.1 .1 Methods of Communicable Disease Control
Communicable disease can be controlled and eradicated from the community. When
thinking about the control of diseases it is always good to think of all the possible
methods. In most cases one or two specific methods will have the greatest effect and
should be the focus of your activity, in other cases some methods will be useless against
the disease. The aim of control is to tip the balance against the agent.
The control and eradication of communicable diseases can be done by:
          Attacking the source of the disease causing organism
          Interrupting the transmission route
          Protecting the susceptible host
You will now look at each method in turn.

1.2.4.1 .1.1 Attacking the Source
There are various specific measures which can be used to control the spread of an
infectious disease.
They include:
          Treating the infected person or animal with the appropriate antibiotics that
             destroy the disease causing-organism.
          Treating the carriers and sub-clinical cases after carrying out screening tests
             among suspected individuals or groups.
                                                                                       xxv
          Treating specific groups of persons who are at high risk of being infected
             (mass treatment). This is called chemoprophylaxis.
          Isolating those persons who are infected with highly infectious diseases
             such as ebola, marburg fever, lassa fever; so as to prevent the spread of the
             organism to other healthy people.
          Treating sick animals such as cattle suffering from brucellosis, immunizing
             animals such as cows from anthrax, and dogs from rabies; killing sick
             animals such as rats to control plague and dogs to prevent rabies; separating
             humans from animals.
          Notifying the local health authorities immediately you suspect a patient is
             suffering from an infectious disease.
Though this does not directly affect the source, it is an essential way of keeping watch
on the number of new cases and thereby monitoring the effectiveness of the control
programme.
All of the methods mentioned on the previous page are methods of controlling the
reservoir - where an animal is the reservoir.
In summary you can state that the measures for attacking the source are:
          Treating the infected person/s
          Treating the carrier
          Mass treatment of persons at risk
          Isolating the infected person/s
          Treating the sick animal such as cows
          Immunizing animals such as dogs and cattle
          Killing the animal reservoir such as rats
          Separating humans and animals

1.2.4.1 .1.1 Interrupting the Transmission Cycle
A number of methods are used to interrupt the transmission cycle. They include the
following:
          Personal hygiene
          Environmental health

                                                                                      xxvi
          Water and sanitation
          Vector control
          Good and adequate housing
          Effective food handling and adequate nutrition
NB: Sterilization of medical equipment and the use of sterile surgical equipment (These
methods are useful for interrupting the transmission of diseases such as, Human
Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) infection and hepatitis-B infection.
Remember: A clean environment and good personal hygiene are the most important
measures in the primary prevention of diseases.

1.2.4.1 .1.1 Protecting the Host
This is the third principle of controlling the spread of communicable disease in the
community. Any person who is not yet infected by a specific disease-causing organism
is known as a susceptible host. This is because they are at risk of contracting the
infection. All susceptible hosts must be protected from contracting the infection.

Remember: The most effective way of controlling communicable diseases is to use a
combination of methods: attacking the source of the infecting organism, interrupting
the route of transmission, and protecting the susceptible host.
  1.2.4.2 Basic management of common diseases
There are various specific and general measures for protecting the host.
  1.2.4.2.1 Specific Measures
  Immunization using vaccines such as the KEPI vaccine
  Chemoprophylaxis using for example:
  Proguanil (PaludrineR) to suppress malaria parasites
  Tetracycline during cholera outbreaks
  Cotrimoxazole during plague Outbreaks

  1.2.4.2.2 General Measures
  Use of barriers such as bed nets, gowns, gloves to prevent insect bites (especially
     mosquitoes)
  Use of chemicals for example insect repellents to prevent mosquito bites
  Wearing shoes to prevent penetration by hookworms from the soil
                                                                                     xxvii
  Adequate housing to reduce overcrowding
  Improved nutrition
  Adequate ventilation
  Health education
  1.2.4.2.3 Other Control Measures
There are other useful measures that can be taken to control the spread of communicable
disease. Among these is the notification of disease. Notification requires you to keep
watch (surveillance) on the number of new cases of communicable diseases in your area
of work and to immediately inform the local health authority when you come across a
patient suffering from an infectious disease. One of the main reasons for notification is
to help the health authorities take measures to confirm your suspicion and to control the
spread of the disease. Notification of infectious communicable diseases is the
responsibility of all health care workers. It is also a legal requirement according to the
Public Health Act, Chapter (cap) 242; section eight of the laws of Kenya.
Remember: It is your responsibility to notify your local health authority immediately
should you suspects the presence of an infectious disease.
   1.2.4.3 List any six notifiable diseases found in Kenya.
   1.2.4.3.1 Notifiable Diseases in Kenya
· Plague
· Cholera
· Measles
· Poliomyelitis
· Diphtheria
· Tuberculosis
· Anthrax
· Trypanasomiasis
· Typhoid fever
· Whooping cough
· Meningococcal meningitis
· Rabies
Yellow fever


                                                                                     xxviii
The diseases in bold spread so quickly that they need international control measures.
These diseases are reported by the Ministry of Health to the World Health Organization
(WHO).
Application of Communicable Disease Control Measures
The actual application of the control methods you have just seen can be undertaken by
different groups of people and institutions at various levels. These include individuals
and village level, dispensary and health centre level and the district and central
government (Ministry of Health) level.
Remember: A successful communicable disease control program is the one that
involves members of the community.
Further reading
Communicable diseases 4th Edition by Erick Nordberg
Basic epidemiology by r.Beaglehole
  1.2.4.4 Learning Activities
Group discussions
  1.2.4.4.1 Practical activities
Task: S ward in Y Sub County has been the most affected area with Communicable and
non-communicable disease cases and high mortality rate. You have been assigned as the
community health worker of that particular area. Carry out a survey on how you will
curb that problem and improve the health standards of that community.


  1.2.4.4.2 A case study
Typhoid fever is a disease that manifests clinically with high fever and headache.
Suppose Abebe is infected with the infectious agent of typhoid fever, but he has no
manifestations of the disease. He works in a cafe and among 20 people he served in one
day, five got infected, but only three of these developed the disease. Among the three
who developed typhoid fever, two recovered and one died.

 1. What are the likely modes of transmission?
 2. Which of the affected persons are active cases and which are carriers?
 3. Can you group the 20 people who were served in the cafe into the four stages of the
     natural history of a communicable disease?
  1.2.4.5 Self-Assessment
   1.2.4.6 Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials
The following are the resources:

                                                                                    xxix
   Internet
   Telephone/Computers /laptops
   Stationery
   Experts from the industry
   standard manuals
   Writing materials
   Stationery
   Training manuals




                                   xxx
        REPUBLIC OF KENYA




          LEARNING GUIDE




               FOR




APPLICATION OF MEDICAL-LEGAL ETHICS




              LEVEL 6




                                      xxxi
   TVET CDACC
P.O. BOX 15745-00100
     NAIROBI




                       xxxii
First published 2020
©Copyright TVET CDACC


All rights reserved. No part of this learning guide may be reproduced, distributed, or transmitted
in any form or by any means, including photocopying, recording, or other electronic or mechanical
methods without the prior written permission of the TVET CDACC, except in the case of brief
quotations embodied in critical reviews and certain other non-commercial uses permitted by
copyright law. For permission requests, write to the Council Secretary/CEO, at the address below:


Council Secretary/CEO
TVET Curriculum Development, Assessment and Certification Council
P.O. Box 15745–00100
Nairobi, Kenya
Email: info@tvetcdacc.go.ke
Website: www.tvetcdacc.go.ke




                                                ii
  FOREWORD



The provision of quality education and training is fundamental to the Government’s overall
strategy for social economic development. Quality education and training will contribute to
achievement of Kenya’s development blue print and sustainable development goals. Reforms in
education are necessary to align the sector to the provisions of the Constitution of Kenya 2010.
This triggered the formulation of the Policy Framework on “Reforming Education and Training in
Kenya” (Sessional Paper No. 1 of 2019). A key provision of this policy is the radical change in the
design, development and delivery of Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET)
which is the key to unlocking the country’s potential for industrialization. This policy requires that
training in TVET be Competency Based, Curriculum development be industry led, certification be
based on demonstration of competence and that mode of delivery allows for multiple entry and
exit in TVET programs.


  The State Department for Vocational and Technical Training (VTT) has a responsibility of
  facilitating the process of inculcating knowledge, skills and attitudes necessary for catapulting
  the nation to a globally competitive country, hence the paradigm shift to embrace Competency
  Based Education and Training (CBET) to address the mismatch between skills acquired through
  training and skills needed by industry as well as increase the global competitiveness of Kenyan
  labor force. The Technical and Vocational Education and Training Act No. 29 of 2013 and the
  Sessional Paper No. 1 of 2019 on Reforming Education and Training in Kenya, emphasizes the
  need to reform curriculum development, assessment and certification to respond to the unique
  needs of the industry.


This learning guide has been developed to support the implementation of CBET curriculum in
Biotechnology Level 5 and is intended to guide the trainee through the learning process. It is my
conviction that this learning guide will play a critical role towards supporting the development of
competent human resource for Biotechnology sector’s growth and sustainable development.




                                                  iii
iv
v
 Background Information


This learning guide will enable the trainee to acquire competencies to undertake various processes
in Application of Medical-Legal Ethics. It provides practical and theoretical learning activities,
simplified content, illustrations and self-assessment items to guide the trainee in the learning
process. It also provides links and references for further reading.


 Layout of the Trainee Guide


 Performance standards: These are obtained from the performance criteria statements in the
  related unit of competency of the Occupational Standards (OS)
 Information Sheet: This section covers information relating to the specific learning outcome.
  This information should include but not limited to meaning of terms, methods, processes/
  procedures/ guidelines, Illustrations (photographs, pictures, videos, charts, plans, digital content
  links, simulations links) and case studies. This section also provides additional information
  sources relevant to the learning outcome e.g. books, web links
 Learning activities: This section covers practical activities related to the Performance Criteria
  statements, Knowledge in relation to Performance Criteria as given under content in the
  curriculum Special instructions related to learning activities
Self-Assessment: This section must be related to the Performance Criteria, Required Knowledge
and Skills in the Occupational Standards. This section requires the trainee to evaluate their
acquisition of skills, knowledge and attitude in relation to the learning outcome. A variety of
assessment items such as written and practical tests which emphasizes on the application of
knowledge, skills and attitude is recommended
The self-assessment items should be valid, relevant and comprehensive to the level of qualification
in the learning outcome
Tools, equipment, materials and supplies: This section should provide for the requirements of
the learning outcome in terms of tools, equipment, supplies and materials. The section should be
adequate, relevant and comprehensive for the learning outcome.

                                                 vi
References: Information sources should be quoted and presented as required in the APA format
The units of learning covered in this learning guide are as presented in the table below:




                                                vii
CHAPTER 3: APPLICATION OF MEDICAL-LEGAL ETHICS
Unit of learning code HE/CU/TT/CM/05/6
Related Unit of Competency in Occupational Standard Applying Medical Legal Ethics in
Operational Theatre Technology
      66       1.1 Introduction to the unit of learning
This unit standard specifies the competencies required to apply medical legal ethics in POTT. It
involves acquiring knowledge on the medical-legal and ethical issues, applying medical-legal
ethics, and liaising with law enforcement team. It also involves documenting medical legal
ethical issues in POTT.
      67       1.2 Summary of Learning Outcomes
 1. Acquire knowledge medical- legal ethics in POTT
 2. Apply medical legal ethics in POTT
 3. Liaise with law enforcement team on medical legal and ethical issues
 4. Document medical legal- ethical issues in POTT
 5.
       1.2.1          Learning Outcome 1:1 Acquire knowledge medical- legal ethics in PTT


           1.2.1.1 Introduction to the learning outcome


This learning outcome specifies the roles and responsibilities of PTT staff as per WHO, relevant
regulations/laws and workplace policy . It includes ethics deals with how providers apply a
moral code of conduct to patients in a healthcare setting, taking into account the patients’ self
respect, individuality, safety and welfare.




                                              viii
         1.2.1.2     Performance Standard
   Roles and responsibilities of PTT staff are identified as per WHO, relevant
    regulations/laws and workplace policy.
   Medical- legal and ethical issues in PT are identified as per the WHO and relevant
    sources of law.
   Medical legal guidelines are acquired in accordance with workplace policy and relevant
    laws.




     1.2.1.3 Information Sheet
    Definition of terms


   applied ethics - the practical application of moral standards to the conduct of individuals
    involved in organizations
   bioethicists - persons who specialize in the field of bioethics
   bioethics - also called biomedical ethics, the moral dilemmas and issues of advanced medicine
    and medical research
   comparable worth - also known as pay equity, the theory that extends equal pay requirements
    to all persons doing equal work
   compassion - ability to have a gentle, caring attitude toward patients and fellow employees
   cost/benefit analysis - also called utilitarianism, an ethical approach in which the benefit of the
    decision should outweigh the costs
   empathy - the ability to understand the feelings of another person without actually experiencing
    the pain or distress that person is going through
   ethics - the branch of philosophy relating to morals and moral principles
   integrity - the unwavering adherence to one's principles; dediication to maintaining high
    standards
   laws - rules or actions prescribed by a governmental authority that have a binding legal force


                                                 ix
   medical ethics - moral conduct based on principles regulating the behavior of healthcare
    professionals
   medical etiquette - standards of professional behavior that physicians use for conduct with other
    physicians
   medical practice acts - laws established in all 50 states that define the practice of medicine as
    well as requirements and methods for licensure in a particular state.
   Morality - the quality of being virtuous or practicing the right conduct
   principles of autonomy - right to make decisions about one's own life
   principle of beneficence - in doing good, we must not harm patients while we are trying to help
    them. Principle of justice warns us that equals must be treated equally
   principle of non-malfeasance - means "first do not harm"
   quality assurance - gathering and evaluating information about the services provided as well as
    the results achieved and comparing this information with an accepted standard
   sanctity of life - sacredness of human life; all human beings must be protected.
   sexual harassment - unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors
   sympathy - pity for someone else
   tolerance - respect for those whose opinions, practices, race, religion, or nationality differ from
    our own
   administrative law - a branch of law that covers regulations set by government agencies
   assault - imminent apprehension of bodily harm
   battery - requires bodily harm and unlawful touching (touching w/o consent of patient)
   breach - neglect of an understanding between two parties; failing to perform a legal duty
   breach of contract - the failure, without legal excuse, to perform any promise or to carry out any
    of the terms of an agreement; failure to perform a contractual duty.
   case law - also called common law; case law is based on decisions made by judges
   civil law - all law that is not criminal, including the law of torts (personal wrongs) and contract,
    property, maritime, and commercial law.




   Competent - capable of making a decision without mental confusion due to drugs, alcohol, or
    other reasons


                                                  x
    constitutional law - the inviolable rights, privileges, or immunities secured and protected for
     each citizen by the Constitution of the United States or by the constitution of each state
    contract law - that division of law that includes enforceable promises and agreements between
     two or more persons to do or not to do a particular thing.
    criminal law - those laws intended to protect society from
     the wrongdoing of an individual
    defendant - person or group of people sued civilly or prosecuted criminally in a court of law
    plaintiff - the person or party who brings a case to court
    regulations - rules or laws made by agencies
    tort law - Law that deals with harm to a person or a person's property.
    Confidentiality - professionals involved in the patient's care, or under subpoena, or in a court of
     law, or when the patient has signed a release of confidentiality
    medicare - health care for people over the age of 65
    national practitioners data bank (NPDB) - a listing of names that assists with peer review of
     physicians.
    preferred provider organization (PPO) - a managed care concept in which the patient must use a
     medical provider who is under contract with the insurer for an agreed-upon fee in order to
     receive co-payment form the insurer.
    primary care physician (PCP) - HMO-designated physician to manage and control an enrolled
     patient's medical care.




Sources of Law
The sources of law are the origin or where specific laws derive their source from. In the world
over, laws have been found to derive their source from the constitutions, Judicial decree, religion
and relevant legislation i.e. parliamentary acts.




                                                  xi
xii
68      Customs - Customs play an important role in the framing of the laws. Most of the laws
that came from customs are recognized by state later. Since ancient period we can notice that the
dispute among tribals were resolved by the head of the Tribes using their customs and traditions.
Customs became laws when tribes extended into the formation of state. State cannot actually
ignore the customs of the country. The common law of England for example sprang mainly from
customs.For example Bull-Taming sport culture of Tamils of India resulted into the creation of
Jallikattu Law in 2017. (Read the box for more information about Jallikattu Law of 2017)

69      Religion - The religion practiced by Primitive communities played a decisive role in
evolving the laws of the state later. Religion was a basis of law for most of the nation. The origin
of Hindu law can be traced in the code of Manu. The origin of Mohammedian law can be traced
in Sharia law. Divine law is a law revealed through man from God. God is the ultimate source of
divine law. For Christians Ten Commandments were the first law given by the Lord Almighty to
his people and was considered as the basis of law. “Indeed the early law of Rome was little more
than a body of technical religious rules, a system of means for obtaining religious rights through
the proper carrying out of certain religious formulas”. -Woodrow Wilson

70      Judicial decisions - Gettell maintains that the ‘state arose not as the creator of law but as
the interpreter and enforcer of custom’. The function of the Judiciary is to interpret and declare the
law. While discharging its function the judiciary creates new laws. The laws later gets recognized
by the state. Judicial decisions thus became an another source of law. Some time the verdict of
High Court and Supreme Court are treated as laws.

71      Equity - When laws are ambiguous and do not fit in, the principles of equity are applied
and cases are decided according to common sense and fairness. “Equity is a body of rules existing
by the side of the original civil law, founded on distinct principles and claiming incidentally to
supersede the civil law in virtue of a superior sanctity inherent in those principles.” - Sir Henry
Maine




                                                 xiii
72       Scientific commentaries - Another source of law are scientific commentaries. when the
commentary appears it is understood only as an argument, later on its authority is recognized as
more authoritative than the Judicial decision.

     Legislature - Most of the laws in the modern times are framed by legislature and it is one of
  the most important source of law. Indian constitution is a classical example where the best
  provisions of other constitutions are borrowed and made it available for the best of our
  nation“The state is founded on the minds of its citizens, who are moral agents.. a bad people
  means a bad state and a bad laws.”




  Types Of Laws


  Criminal Law
  Health care in hospital institutions have progressed and improved quality, but it is still
  inseparable from the public spotlight. Even though, there are many laws and regulations that
  regulate health care and criminal law in medical field. In the Criminal Code regulated about
  several criminal law in the medical field. Then, to follow the development of the community, so
  special legislation in the health field was established, such as Law Number 36 Year 2009 on
  Health, Law Number 44 Year 2009 on Hospitals, Law Number 29 Year 2004 on Medical
  Practice. In Law Number 36 Year 2009 on Health in Article 2 it is stated that health development
  is carried out based on humanity, balance, benefits, protection, respect for rights and obligations,
  justice, gender and non-discrimination and religious norms. Criminal laws are used to punish a
  defendant on behalf of the state and the public and deter future criminal behavior. Because
  criminal charges do not compensate victims of preventable harms, those individuals may have
  to pursue an action in civil court for damages. The same criminal defendant can become a civil
  defendant simultaneously, and a state or federal court must apply completely different legal
  standards for finding an injury and compensating a plaintiff patient.


Tort law


                                                 xiv
  Tort law seeks to compensate victims of certain actions or inactions based on the breach of a
  legal duty that caused damages. Plaintiff patients seeking redress for a preventable harm can file
  a tort, or personal injury, suit in state or federal court and must establish that the defendant's
  action met the standards for the criteria of duty, breach, causation, and damages. The defendant
  provider or facility then may present evidence to defend the suit and show that these four
  requirements were not met.

In tort law, providers and facilities connected to a preventable harm can be named in a suit as
defendants based on their respective roles and duties; accordingly, employers may be vicariously
liable for employees’ actions, corporate entities can be held liable for their affiliated facilities,
and providers can be jointly and severally liable for actions for which they each held
responsibility (Insco v. Aetna Health and Life Ins. Co., 2009). State courts use case law decisions
that penalize defendants and compensate plaintiffs to uphold “private rights of action.” These
decisions could have consequences for future plaintiffs with the same complaints.

For healthcare providers and facilities sued based on the failure to meet a certain “standard of
care,” the legal standard of care does not equate directly to a medical standard of care. The legal
standard simply asks that a provider follow the same course as a reasonable provider would
under the same circumstances: there are no technical requirements as in a medical standard of
care (Moffett and Moore, 2011). A jury that finds that the requirements for a tort suit are met will
find the defendant liable for the plaintiff's damages. These damages may be considered
“compensatory,” reflecting the monetizable damages sustained, or “punitive,” scaled to
effectively penalize the defendant.

Laws of Contract

Contract law issues such as non-compete agreements, call schedules, tail insurance,
compensation methods, and ownership of patient records must be carefully evaluated,
understood and often negotiated and changed in order to create a work environment where the
employees’ and employers’ needs are met. In addition, Stark, Anti-Kickback and other
healthcare laws and regulations often relate to the contract relationship and should be addressed.




                                                   xv
Issues that remain unclear or unresolved in employment contracts can often result in irreparable
harm to relationships between the parties with either the healthcare employee or employer
choosing to terminate or not to continue the relationship.


Labour Laws
  The employee relations landscape in Kenya is informed by Article 41 of the Constitution of
  Kenya 2010, which grants every person the right to fair labour practices, including fair
  remuneration, reasonable working conditions, and the right to subscribe to and participate in
  trade union activities. Article 24(1) of the Constitution further sets out that the enjoyment of
  rights and fundamental freedoms by any person should not prejudice the rights and fundamental
  freedoms of others. Health service provision falls within the “essential services” category.
  Section 81 (1) of the Labour Relations Act, 2007, defines essential service as, “A service the
  interruption of which would endanger the life of a person or health of the population or any part
  of the population.” Section 78(1) of the Labour Relations Act, 2007, states that no person should
  take part in a strike or lockout if the employee and employer were engaged in an essential
  service. Section 81(3) provides that there shall be no strike or lockout for an essential service,
  and Section 81(4) provides that any trade dispute in a service listed as essential shall be
  adjudicated upon by the Industrial Court. Since the promulgation of the Constitution in 2010,
  health workers in the public service have, on several occasions, participated in industrial action.
  The escalation of unrest amongst health workers in many counties, which often causes
  disruption of health services, is to blame for needless loss of lives. The Ministry of Health is
  committed to stemming escalating unrest in the health sector, as well as cultivating cordial
  relations amongst health workers, unions, and the health sector leaders. The development of user
  guide on employee relations for the health sector in Kenya is a critical step towards meeting this
  commitment. The user guide aligns with the Labour Laws and the Constitution of Kenya 2010,
  and seek amicable resolution of health workers’ concerns and disputes, providing opportunity
  for dialogue at all avenues.


  Acts of Parliament related to health
  Act No. 21 of 2017 - An Act of Parliament to establish a unified health system, to coordinate
  the inter-relationship between the national government and county government health systems,
                                                xvi
  to provide for regulation of health care service and health care service providers, health products
  and health technologies and for connected purposes.
Public Health Officers (Training, Registration and Licensing) Act, 2013

  An Act of Parliament to make provision for the training, registration and licensing of public
  health officers and public health technicians, to regulate their practice, to provide for the
  establishment, powers and functions of the Public Health Officers and Public Health
  Technicians Council and for connected purposes




        Case study

Background: Occasionally, a patient in critical care can die no matter what we do. Others may
have had a good chance of recovery if admitted, but then limited resources impact on admission.
Profound ethical questions confront the medical personnel as they watch and wait helplessly.
Setting: Critical Care Unit, Moi Teaching and Referral Hospital, Eldoret Objectives: To explore
dilemmas on end of life which have a heavy bearing on Doctors and Nurses: legally, morally and
ethically.

Materials and methods: A case study of ZX derived from the local setting involving a patient
who was in the Critical Care Unit for one year sixty five days. This was experiential: a best case
scenario. Consent to highlight and publish the case study was sought from a relative of the
deceased. The case study consist of a content analysis of the patient file, ethical issues arising were
noted and were cross-checked to ensure they reflect the entries in the patient file. This study seeks
to dissect some ethical issues experienced in management of ZX.

Conclusion: Modern health care has given rise to extremely complex and multifaceted ethical
dilemmas. More often the health care workers (Physicians/nurses) are unprepared to manage these
competently. There is no Law or guidelines in Kenya on end-of-life issues, making ethical
dilemmas inevitable. ZX case brings out four topics that pose particularly vexing problems to the
health care givers in their practice of medicine: Respect and equal treatment; Communication and
consent; Decision making for incompetent patients; and end of life issues. Professional health care
                                                 xvii
providers associations in Kenya should issue pragmatic policy guidelines to safeguard the Kenyan
medics.




              1.2.1.4 Learning Activities



         1.2.1.4.1 Practical activities
        Identify the roles and responsibilities of perioperative theatre technologist.
        Identify medical- legal issues in PTT.
        Acquire Medical legal guidelines in PTT
        Determine the nature of the offence in PTT
        Identify appropriate enforcement officers for medical legal issues
        Communicate to the enforcement team about a medical legal issue
        Record Medical legal- ethical issues in PTT
        Prepare and disseminated Medical legal- ethical issues reports


       1.2.1.5 Self-Assessment
  You are provided with the following questions for self -assessment, attempt them and check
  your responses.
        What are the roles and responsibilities of perioperative theatre technologist?
        Which are th medical- legal issues in PTT?
        What are the Medical legal guidelines in PTT?
        What are the nature of offences in PTT?
        Which are the appropriate enforcement officers for medical legal issues?
        How do you communicate to the enforcement team about a medical legal issue?
        How do you record Medical legal- ethical issues in PTT?
        How do you prepare and disseminated Medical legal- ethical issues reports



                                                  xviii
      1.2.1.6 Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials
The following resources are provided
       Workplace or assessment location
       Personal protective gears
       Student file




  1.2.2         Learning Outcome 2: Apply medical legal ethics in PTT


      1.2.2.1 Introduction to the learning outcome
 This learning outcome specifies competencies in identifying medical legal offences and
 implications related to PTT which are applied as per the relevant regulations. The regulations
 are identifiable as per the legal system as stipulated in the laws relating to the organization, the
 Employment Act and the medical ethics.
      1.2.2.2 Performance standards
                 Medical legal offences related to PTT are identified and applied as per given
                  relevant regulations/law and work place policy.
                 Medical -legal implications related to PTT are identified as per the work place
                  policy and relevant source of law.
                 Medical legal regulations are implemented as per given legal system.
            
      1.2.2.3 Information Sheet


      1.2.2.3.1 Law and Morality
 Law and morality are two normative systems that control and regulate behaviors in a human
 community so as to allow harmonious and effective intersubjectivity between individuals who
 recognize one another as bearers of rights. The two notions have their common foundation in
 the concept of individual autonomy and equal respect for everyone. They have a
 complementary relationship. Law compensates for the functional weaknesses of morality and
 morality tempers the mechanical implementation of positive law through the notions of
                                                  xix
solidarity and responsibility (Jerome E, 1989). Different legal thinkers have interpreted the
relationship between law and morality in different ways. On the one hand, there are those who
argue that law and morality are independent – though not unrelated. For this first group, a law
cannot be disregarded merely because it is morally indefensible (Alexy,2002). On the other
hand, there are those who maintain that law and morality are interdependent.
The relationship between law and morality can be stated in the following manner:
  Law is related to morality in the setting forth of those virtues that are related to the common
     good. This does not mean that positive human law should prohibit all vices nor command all
     virtues: rather it prohibits only the grosser failings of mankind which threaten the very survival
     of society and commands those virtues which can be ordained by human means to the common
     good.
  Law is related to morality by the moral obligation imposed, i.e., by the necessity of an act in
     relation to a necessary end-since law as the command of practical reason necessarily implies an
     obligation.
  Law is related to morality inasmuch as law is subject to and cannot contradict moral principles,
     i.e., natural moral law.
  Law is related to morality inasmuch as both stem and are directed by the same source: practical
     reason or prudence.


   1.2.2.3.2 Medical-legal issues and ethics in health


The main legal issues in the healthcare system relate to medical negligence, informed consent
and confidentiality. There are several ethical issues faced by health practitioners and patients in
the healthcare sector
Confidentiality and Privacy of patients - The protection of private patient information is one
of the most important ethical and legal issues in the field of healthcare. Conversations between
a physician and a patient are strictly confidential, as is information about an individual’s medical
condition. Specific provisions of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, or
HIPAA, define exactly what information can be released and to whom.




                                                 xx
Healthcare system malpractice and tort reform – The main reason why governments work
on reducing medical malpractice and have implemented tort reform is to reduce expenditure on
unnecessary healthcare services. Besides reducing overall health costs, these reforms can also
lead to a decrease in global malpractice risk.

Physician-assisted Suicide (PAS) and euthanasia – Euthanasia refers to the process of a
deliberately ending a patient’s life in order to relieve them of suffering. It is illegal in most
countries but is still a hotly debated ethical issue surrounding whether it should or should not be
legalized. PAS is the practice of providing a competent patient with a prescription for medication
that will end their life. In this case, the patient would have to self-administer the medication,
directly or through a machine.

Transmission of Diseases - The recent global outbreak of the Corona virus put a renewed
emphasis on the right of healthcare providers to protect themselves from communicable
diseases, whether by direct or indirect contact with an infected patient. Ethical and legal
questions arise when a patient’s health history is not provided to the medical staff.

Informed consent – Informed consent means providing an in-depth understanding of the risks
and benefits of a treatment to a patient. This allows the patient to decide whether or not they
wish to undergo a procedure. Informed consent is based on the principle that patients should
have autonomy over the treatment they receive. Healthcare providers should have a document
providing proof the patient has full knowledge of the risks, benefits and possible consequences
of a particular treatment



   1.2.2.3.3 Laws relating to persons and organizations

Considering all aspects of health, there are rules that regulate the rights and responsibilities of
governments, health practitioners, organizations, civil society and a country’s population. These
rules make up the legal framework for health. They are classified in different forms including:
statutory laws, regulatory and administrative laws, contracts, case law, and customary laws.
WHO is mandated in making these rules as per every country’s requirement.

                                                 xxi
Health laws are used to establish commitment to goals, and therefore creating a drive for
action. To achieve health goals, law is required to create different organizations and contracts
that provide health services. In turn, organizations such as health ministries, the private sector
or civil society, have mandates, policies and strategies based on legal rules that guide their work.


There are also many rules that structure what health organizations and individuals should do,
and what they may not do. This interaction between different health laws results in health system
functions being carried out and health products and services being delivered.


   1.2.2.3.4 Employment law and Employment Act


Some employee relations that relate to the health sector are stipulated as per the following:
  Article 41 of the Constitution of Kenya 2010 - Grants every person the right to fair labour
     practices, including fair remuneration, reasonable working conditions, and the right to subscribe
     to and participate in trade union activities.
  Article 24(1) of the Constitution - Sets out that the enjoyment of rights and fundamental
     freedoms by any person should not prejudice the rights and fundamental freedoms of others.
     Health service provision falls within the “essential services” category.
  Section 81 (1) of the Labour Relations Act, 2007 - Defines essential service as, “A service the
     interruption of which would endanger the life of a person or health of the population or any
     part of the population.”
  Section 78(1) of the Labour Relations Act, 2007 - States that no person should take part in a
     strike or lockout if the employee and employer were engaged in an essential service.
  Section 81(3) of the Labour Relations Act, 2007 - Provides that there shall be no strike or lockout
     for an essential service.
  Section 81(4) of the Labour Relations Act, 2007 - Provides that any trade dispute in a service
     listed as essential shall be adjudicated upon by the Industrial Court.


  Health Act, 2017 - Established a unified health system, to coordinate the inter-relationship
     between the national government and county government health systems, to provide for



                                                     xxii
     regulation of health care service and health care service providers, health products and health
     technologies and for connected purposes


   1.2.2.3.5 Medical Ethics
Medical ethics involves examining a specific problem, usually a clinical case, and using values,
facts, and logic to decide what the best course of action should be.
Medical ethics are set on a foundation of some core principles which include:
Autonomy
Respecting patients privacy, confidentiality and being truthful about their medical care.
Provide the information and allow the patients to make their own decisions regarding their care .
Honor and respect the patients’ decisions of either accepting or declining care or information.
Beneficence
Do everything good in regard to the patient
Nonmaleficence
Avoid causing injury or suffering to patients
Justice
Treat patients fairly and equitably.


 1.2.3       Learning Outcome 3: Liaise with law enforcement team on medical legal and
             ethical issues


     1.2.3.1 Introduction to the Learning Outcome
This learning outcome specifies competencies in identifying nature of the offences and the liable
enforcement officers as per the laws and the workplace policies. Effective communication to the
enforcement team is also taken as per the communication channels in the administrative
structure.




                                                xxiii
       1.2.3.2 Performance standard
            Nature of the offence is identified as per given regulations/laws and workplace
               policy.
            Enforcement officers are identified according to work place policy and given
               regulations/laws.
            Communication to the enforcement team is carried out as per communication
               channels and work place policy.


       1.2.3.3 Information Sheet


1.2.3.3.1 Enforcement Team
   1. National Police Service
The Article 243 of the constitution of Kenya established Kenya's National Police Service as the
umbrella law enforcement organ in Kenya after a dissolution of Kenya Police Force and
Administration Police Force. The NPS is under the overall and independent command of the
Inspector-General, who is appointed by the President and approved by Parliament.

   2. Medical Practitioners and Dentists Board

The medical Practitioners and dentist board is established by the constitution of Kenya with a
mandate to regulate the practice of medicine, dentistry and medical institutions.

The board’s core functions are as follows:

Training – approval of training institutions for medical and dental practitioners

Registration – Register eligible medical and dental practitioners

Licensing – issue annual license to private practice specialists

Education – Monitor university examinations for medical and dental students.

Inspection – Inspect and accredit institutions for medical and dental training




                                                xxiv
1.2.3.3.2 Organization of the Judiciary
  The Judiciary is one of the three arms of government established under chapter 10, Article 159
  of the Constitution of Kenya. It is established as an independent custodian of justice, with the
  primary role being to exercise judicial authority. The key functions include:
1. Administration of justice
2. Formulation and implementation of judicial policies
3. Compilation and dissemination of case law and other legal information for the effective
   administration of justice


  The Court system has been decentralized with the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal
  having their own Presidents and the High Court having a Principal Judge as heads of the
  respective institutions.The Supreme Court of Kenya is established under Article 163 of the
  Constitution of Kenya. It comprises of Seven judges: the Chief Justice, who is the president of
  the Court, the Deputy Chief Justice, who is the vice-president of the Supreme Court and five
  other judges.

  The High Court consists of a number of judges to be prescribed by an Act of Parliament. The
  Court is organized and administered in the manner prescribed by an Act of Parliament. The
  Court has a Principal Judge, who is elected by the judges of the High Court from among
  themselves.

  The Judiciary also consists of the Environment and Land Court as well as the Employment and
  Labour Relations Court which are courts of equal status as the High Court.

  The subordinate courts consists of the Magistrates’ Courts, Kadhis Courts, Court Martial, and
  any other court or local Tribunal established by an Act of Parliament.




                                               xxv
1.2.3.3.3 Health Organization Structure/Protocol
  The executive is the Cabinet Secretary in the ministry of health, under which is the Principal
  Secretary and then the Director of Medical Services. The Director of Medical Services
  coordinates and oversees the functioning of the six departments, whose regulations include:
      The Department of Preventive and Promotive Health is further subdivided into six other sectors
       tasks with: National Public Health, Disease Surveillance and Epidemic response, non-
       communicable diseases, family health, environmental health, and national public health
       laboratory independent of each other.
      The Curative and Rehabilitation health services handle divisions of national referral services,
       forensic & pathology services, emergencies & disaster management, clinical practice and blood
       transition.
      Standard and Quality assurance docket handles issues of alternative and traditional medicine,
       quality assurance, and legislation & regulation.
      Health sector coordination & inter-governmental control department manages health sector
       intergovernmental affairs and coordination.
      The administrative services functions include: monitors office operations such as finance,
       accounts, ICT, HRM, SCMD and legal matters.
      Department of Policy, Planning and health financing which is the backbone of the Ministry of
       Health Kenya manages health policy & planning, Health care financing and the Health informatics,
       research development, and Monitoring & evaluation.




                                                  xxvi
https://www.health.go.ke/about-us/organizational-structure/




                                           xxvii
1.2.3.3.4 Leadership and Interpersonal skills
                                                 73
 74        Interpersonal skills help in understanding other people and adjusting your approach to
  work together effectively. For example, as a nurse you are required to comfort and care for the
  patients. interpersonal skills are therefore integral for the industry, especially empathy and patience.
      75      Unlike technical or “hard” skills, interpersonal skills or “soft” skills are easily
 transferable across industries and positions. Employers value interpersonal skills because they
       contribute to positive work environments and help maintain an efficient workflow.

  The following is a list of interpersonal skills:

    Leadership - is an important interpersonal skill that involves effective decision making.
       Effective leaders incorporate many other interpersonal skills, like empathy and patience,
       to make decisions. Leadership skills can be used by both managers and individual
       contributors. In any role, employers value people who take ownership to reach common
       goals.
    Active listening - means listening to others with the purpose of gathering information and
       engaging with the speaker. Active listeners avoid distracting behaviors while in
       conversation with others. This can mean putting away or closing laptops or mobile devices
       while listening, and asking and answering questions when prompted.
    Dependability – dependable people can be relied on in any given situation. This can include
       anything from being punctual to keeping promises. Employers highly value dependable
       workers and trust them with important tasks and duties.
    Empathy - A worker’s emotional intelligence is how well they understand the needs and
       feelings of others. Employers may hire empathetic or compassionate employees to create
       a positive, high-functioning workplace.
    Teamwork - The ability to work together as a team is extremely valuable in every
       workplace. Teamwork involves many other interpersonal skills like communication, active
       listening, flexibility and responsibility. Those who are good team players are often given
       important tasks in the workplace and may be seen as good candidates for promotions.



                                                   xxviii
1.2.3.3.5 Communication of Medical Legal Issues
  Accurate and sensitive communication of health care information is key to effective patient
  management in all health care settings. Sensitive health care status of a patient may be
  embarrassing if it falls in the wrong hands. Medical ethics of medicine and statutory provisions
  emphasize that, the obligation of the physician is to safeguard patient confidences. However,
  threats on confidentiality of medical information are very important since communication has
  been characterized by growing use of email, facsimile, and the Internet.
  Medical legal issues are in three key areas which include:
    Confidentiality/breach of privacy - . Conversations between a physician and a patient are strictly
       confidential, as is information about an individual’s medical condition (Keers-Sanchez A,2003).
    Informed consent – provision of an in-depth understanding of the risks and benefits of a
       treatment to a patient is very important. This allows the patient to decide whether or not they
       wish to undergo a procedure. Informed consent is based on the principle that patients should
       have autonomy over the treatment they receive (Scioscia A,2000).
    Defamation - defamation occurs when false words are spoken (slander) or written (libel) to a
       third party which exposes the individual to hatred, contempt, ridicule, or which causes the
       individual to be shunned or avoided, or which injures the individual or his or her business.
       Medical practitioners are especially sensitive to critical comments by patients. While hurtful,
       these comments are often opinions and are not necessarily considered defamatory because
       they do not contain facts that can be proven untrue (Harsham P,1984).




1.2.3.3.6 Administrative skills
Administrative professionals are required office-related tasks. For the most part, they are
required to ensure that all clerical work and customer handling is performed to the highest
standards of professionalism. The following skills are required for effective office
administration:
Communication skills. - Office administrators are required to have proven written and oral
communication skills. This is because, not only will they be the first point of contact to general
public, but will also be required to carry out clerical tasks that involve exceptional levels of



                                                  xxix
written communication. Spelling, grammar, and sentence structure should be polished to the
highest standards when it comes to office administration.
Filing / paper management - Office administration staff will also need to show their ability to
manage business correspondence. Filing, sorting, and general organization skills are essential for
office administrators. In addition to this, administration staff will also need the ability to organize
their own professional priorities.
Bookkeeping. - General office procedures are necessary for administrative staff, but many
positions will require administration personnel to be familiar with bookkeeping. It is rare that
this is done by hand nowadays, but there are several different computer applications that can be
used to manage financial transactions, including Quicken, Excel, and Turbo Tax.
Typing. - Since ICT is essential for administrative staff in today's era, so too is the ability to type.
Many positions don't denote a specific speed, but general opinion believes this to be around 50
words per minute (wpm) with 100% accuracy. There is no prescribed method of typing, but
those who need to increase their speed may find touch-typing through the “home row” method to
be appropriate for their needs, as it is the most widely taught method of typing and is available in
different software tutorials.
Equipment handling. - Administrative staff may be called upon to do some light to moderate
lifting, so should not see this as an opportunity to avoid laborious tasks. Fortunately, this is rather
limited to tasks such as bringing reams of paper to a copy machine or printer.
Customer service skills. - Having excellent customer service and an orientation towards such traits
is necessary for success as an administration worker. As candidates will be customer facing
many times, they will need to carry themselves with both professionalism and have a pleasant
demeanor.


Research skills. - Administration workers will need to have special talents in research and data
analysis in order to compile reports and harvest research material for other workers within their
department.
Self-motivation. - Administration personnel rarely have management working directly above them
and monitoring their every move. However, any loss of drive or motivation will be immediately
visible to them in terms of the quality of the work being received.


                                                  xxx
Flexibility. - Administration rarely has two similar days. While personnel can be sure of working a
relatively static schedule within typical business hours, there may be occasions where working
outside of the conventional schedule will be required.


1.2.4 Learning Outcome 4: Document medical legal- ethical issues in PTT


1.2.4.1 Introduction to the Learning Outcome
This learning outcome identifies competencies in proper recording, reporting and disseminating
of medical legal-ethical issues to relevant authorities as per work place policy. Appropriate
disposal of waste is key area in medical set up.
1.2.4.2 Performance standards
   1. Medical legal- ethical issues are recorded according to work place policy.
   2. Medical legal- ethical issues reports are prepared and disseminated to relevant authorities
       as per work place policy.


1.2.4.3 Information Sheet


1.2.4.3.1 Documentation of medical legal and ethical issues
  Clear medical record documentation is the key to providing patients with quality care, ensuring
  accurate and timely payment for the services furnished, mitigating malpractice risks, and helping
  healthcare providers evaluate and plan the patient’s treatment and maintain the continuum of
  care (Gutheil TG,1980). Reasons for proper documentation of patients’ medical records
  include:
    Communicates with other health care personnel - Documentation communicates the
       quality of clinical care that providers are delivering to patients and serves as a means to
       facilitate the patient navigation continuum of care, from EM to HM and beyond (Gutheil
       TG,1997).

    Reduces risk management exposure - Documentation mitigates risks and reduces the
       chance of malpractice. A well-documented record can help alleviate liability concerns in
       the event of a claim.
                                                   xxxi
    Ensures appropriate reimbursement - A well-documented medical record can facilitate
       effective revenue cycle processes, expedite payment, reduce any “hassles” associated
       with claims processing, and ensure appropriate reimbursement.



Types of medical records

      Patient information sheet - you can find in any medicine bought at a pharmacy. It
       contains very important information about the product such as its conditions, side effects,
       doses or conservation. A medical and healthcare translator must pay a special attention to
       the country regulations and quantities.
      Medical history record - A medical history record summarizes a patient’s medical
       history and also includes some notes and remarks made by healthcare specialists. It can
       be used in a clinical environment, and the medical and healthcare translator should never
       misunderstand the contained information.
      Discharge Summary - A hospital discharge summary is prepared when a patient checks
       out of the hospital. It normally explains the reasons for the hospital admission, the results
       of the tests made, and how the patient feels after the discharge – with some medical
       advices.
      Medical test - It includes a blood test, an urine test, a heart test, and many other variants.
       Figures, chemical forms, molecules, quantities… everything have to been carefully
       looked by the medical and healthcare translator.
      Mental Status Examination - It details the results of a mental exam. Is the patient in
       his/her right mental abilities? A medical specialist will present the results in an official
       document which may required a medical translator.
      Operative Report - It is a report prepared to detail the procedures and findings of a
       surgical operation. The medical and healthcare translator should avoid any ambiguity and
       be as clear and concise as possible.




                                                 xxxii
1.2.4.3.2 Report writing and dissemination on medical legal issues


  Structured reports support readers to interpret and understand the content of the report and may
  reduce subsequent requests for information. A request to provide a medical report will often be
  accompanied by a set of questions and/or a template or form. There is generally an accepted
  structure for medical reports that can be used when a template or form has not been supplied by
  the third party, or when a set of questions has been provided with no instructions. (Seidl I,2011)
  The recommended structure below may assist in preparing a comprehensive medical report
  (Australian Medical Association. GST, 2014).
  Identify yourself and your credentials - The report should state who has prepared its contents
  and their scope of expertise. You can achieve this by providing a paragraph overview outlining
  your experience and expertise.
  Introduce the scope and purpose of the report - The reason for preparation of the report should
  be clearly stated, including any questions you have been asked to consider/address.
  Outline relevant history, outcomes of physical examination and management strategies - The
  report should contain a detailed medical history of events or illnesses that relate to the purpose
  for preparing the report. Information on the general state of health or other relevant factors
  should also be included, along with the proposed management of the condition.
  Provide an opinion and/or respond to questions - This section should include responses to any
  specific questions provided by the third party. The process for reaching stated conclusions
  should be transparent and substantiated within the report. Providing an outline of the clinical
  method employed and the reasoning/justification for your conclusions is recommended.
  Principles for Disseminating Research Results
  Medical researchers should assess ramifications of their research in an effort to balance the
  promise of benefit against potential harms from corrupt application. Only under rare
  circumstances should findings be withheld, and then only to the extent required to reasonably
  protect against misuse(World Medical Association,2013). To fulfill their ethical responsibilities
  with respect to sharing research findings for the ultimate benefit of patients, physicians should:

1. Advocate for timely and transparent dissemination of research data and findings. Physicians
    should not intentionally withhold information for reasons of personal gain.

                                               xxxiii
2. Report the results of research accurately, including subsequent negative findings. This is
    particularly important where the findings do not support the research hypothesis.
3. Maintain a commitment to peer review.
4. Disclose sponsorship and conflicts of interest relating to the research, in keeping with ethics
    guidance.
5. Be responsible in their release of research results to the media, ensuring that any information
    the researcher provides is prompt and accurate and that informed consent to the release of
    information has been obtained from research participants (or participants’ legally authorized
    representative when the participant lacks decision-making capacity) prior to releasing any
    identifiable information (Schroter S,2014).




1.2.4.3.3 Waste Disposal

Sharps disposal is one of the most important duties of any healthcare worker. Proper disposal
keeps us safe from bloodborne pathogens. Improper disposal opens us up to infection and hefty
fines. The key to staying safe from needle sticks and cuts is knowing what sharps are, and how to
dispose of them. A reliable disposal company can carry the lion’s share of the sharps disposal
burden.

Types of medical waste:

      Infectious waste: waste contaminated with blood / blood by-products, cultures and stocks
       of infectious agents, waste originating from isolation ward patients, discarded diagnostic
       samples containing blood and body fluids, infected animals originating from laboratories,
       and contaminated materials
      Pathological waste: identifiable human body parts and contaminated animal carcasses.
      Sharps: disposable scalpels and blades, syringes, needles, etc.
      Chemicals: mercury, solvents, disinfectants etc.
      Pharmaceuticals: unused, contaminated, and out-of-date medicines; vaccines and serums.
      Genotoxic waste: very hazardous teratogenic, mutagenic, or carcinogenic waste, such as
       cytotoxic medicines for the treatment of cancer and their metabolites.
                                              xxxiv
    Radioactive waste: for example glassware contaminated with radioactive diagnostic matter
     or materials used during radiotherapy.
    Heavy metal waste: for example mercury thermometers.




Methods of waste disposal

  Incineration - This is the process of burning of waste in temperatures ranging from 1,800°F to
     2,000°F (982°C to 1093°C). On-site incineration provides the advantage of a quick, easy disposal
     method, but there are emissions concerns.
  Autoclaving - Autoclaving, which is also known simply as steam sterilization, is the most
     commonly utilized alternative to incineration. It is both less costly and carries no
     documented health impacts. In this method, wastes are sterilized or disinfected prior to
     disposal in a landfill. Bags of waste are placed in a chamber and steam is introduced for
     a determined period of time at a specified pressure and temperature. This assures the
     destruction of microorganisms( Pépin J,2014).

  Gas sterilization - In this process, medical waste is fed into an evacuated air-tight
     chamber and treated with a sterilizing agent (such as ethylene oxide or formaldehyde).
     The gas that comes into contact with the waste will kill harmful, infectious agents.

  Chemical disinfection - This process involves the use of chemical agents for disinfection,
     such as chlorine. Chemical disinfection processes are most appropriate for liquid wastes,
     although they can still be used to treat solid wastes. There are a number of factors that
     should be considered regarding the effective usage, including: the types and biology of
     microorganisms in the wastes, degree of contamination, type of disinfectant used as well
     as its concentration and quantity, contact time, and mixing requirements.

  Microwave - The application of microwave technology treatment also can disinfect
     waste. Waste is first shredded, and then mixed with water and internally heated to
     neutralize all present biologicals. Computerized controls are employed to ensure the
     minimum parameters for disinfection and proper equipment function. As with
                                               xxxv
      autoclaving, approximately 90% of medical wastes can be treated with this process. The
      shredding process results in a volume reduction, and energy use is reportedly lower than
      that of an incinerator.

  Irradiation - This method involves sterilizing waste by exposing it to a cobalt source.
      Cobalt gives out gamma radiations that destroy all microbes in waste. The high cost of
      cobalt and high operating costs, however, have discouraged commercial ventures from
      using the technology for the treatment and management of medical waste. There also
      have been some questions raised about the actual process of radiating the material and
      achieving adequate disinfection. As with autoclaving and microwave methods, it is not
      recommended for pathological wastes(WHO/UNICEF,2015).

  Thermal inactivation - This process involves heating waste to temperatures at which
      infectious agents are killed. It is used for treating large volumes of liquid clinical
      wastes. A chamber is preheated to an intense, specified temperature and held for a
      specified time, then released.




Ref
 1. Gutheil TG. Paranoia and progress notes: A guide to forensically informed psychiatric record
      keeping. Hosp Community Psychiatry. 1980
 2. Gutheil TG. The medical record in the acute care setting and issues of confidentiality. In: Sederer
      LL, Rothschild AJ, editors. Acute care psychiatry: Diagnosis and treatment. Baltimore: Lippincott,
      Williams and Wilkins; 1997.
 3. Seidl I. Understanding insurance: The GP’s professional and ethical responsibilities. Aust Fam
      Physician, 2011;40(6):631–33.
 4. Australian Medical Association. GST, conduct monies and workers compensation. Canberra:
      AMA; 2013. Available at https://ama.com.au/ article/gst-conduct-monies-and-workers-
      compensation [Accessed 11 July 2014]



                                                xxxvi
5. World Medical Association. Declaration of Helsinki. 2013. www.wma.net/policies-post/ wma-
    declaration-of-helsinki-ethical-principles-for-medical-research-involving-humansubjects.
6. Schroter S, Price A, Malički M, Richards T, Clarke M. Frequency and format of clinical trial results
    dissemination to patients: a survey of authors of trials indexed in PubMed. BMJ Open
    2019;9:e032701. 10.1136/bmjopen-2019-032701 31636111
7. Pépin J, Abou Chakra CN, Pépin E, Nault V, Valiquette L. Evolution of the global burden of viral
    infections from unsafe medical injections, 2000-2010.PLoSOne. 2014 Jun 9;9(6):e99677.
8. WHO/UNICEF,2015. Water, sanitation and hygiene in health care facilities: status in low- and
    middle-income countries. World Health Organization, Geneva.
9. Scioscia A. Critical connection. Phoenix New Times. June 29, 2000.

10. Harsham P. A misinterpreted word worth $71 million. Medical Economics. 1984;61(5):289-292.
11. Keers-Sanchez A. Mandatory provision of foreign language interpreters in health care services. J
    Legal Med. 2003;24(4):557-578.
12. Agustina, Enny. (2019). criminal law policy in health care. international journal of research in law,
    economic and social sciences. 1. 74-80. 10.32501/injuriless.v1i2.67.


13. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services [27 March 2014];Accreditation. 2013
14. Gostin LO. Public health law in a new century: part I: law as a tool to advance the community's
    health. Journal of the American Medical Association. 2000;283(21):2837–2841.
15. Guh AY, Thompson ND, Schaefer MK, Patel PR, Perz JF. Patient notification for bloodborne
    pathogen testing due to unsafe infection practices in the US health care setting, 2001-
    2011. Medical Care. 2012;50(9):785–791.
16. Moffett P, Moore G. The standard of care: legal history and definitions: the bad and good
    news. Western Journal of Emergency Medicine. 2011;12(1):109–112.
17. Siegel JD, Rhinehart E, Jackson M, Chiarello L, Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory
    Committee [27 March 2014];2007 Guideline for Isolation Precautions: Preventing Transmission
    of Infectious Agents in Healthcare Settings. 2007 available
    at: www.cdc.gov/hicpac/pdf/isolation/Isolation2007.pdf.
18. Wachter RM, Foster NE, Dudley RA. Medicare's decision to withhold payment for hospital
    errors: the devil is in the details. The Joint Commission Journal on Quality and Patient
    Safety. 2008;34(2):116–123.

                                               xxxvii
   19. Roder-DeWan S, Gage AD, Hirschhorn LR, Twum-Danso NAY, Liljestrand J, Asante-Shongwe K, et
      al. (2019) Expectations of healthcare quality: A cross-sectional study of internet users in 12 low-
      and middle-income countries. PLoS Med 16(8): e1002879.
      https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1002879


   20. Alexy, Robert. 2002. The Argument from Injustice: A Reply to Legal Positivism. Oxford: Oxford
      University Press.
   21. Bickenbach, Jerome E. 1989. Law and Morality. Law and Philosophy, 8(3), Symposium on
      Legitimacy of Law: 291–300.




                                   CHAPTER FOUR
                           PROVISION OF FIRST AID SERVICES

Unit of learning code HE/CU/TT/CC/04/6/A

Related Unit of Competency in Occupational Standard: Provide First Aid Services and CPR



                                                xxxviii
 76     4.1 Introduction to the unit of learning
 This unit specifies the competencies required to provide first aid. It involves providing cardio-
 pulmonary resuscitation; managing choking, burns, scalds, trauma, nose bleeding, cuts, fractures,
 drowning, poisoning and snake bites. It also involves assisting patients with existing conditions
 such as asthma, epilepsy and diabetes.

 77      4.2 Summary of Learning Outcomes
 1.      Assess the nature and extent of injury or illness
 2.      Provide first aid intervention
 3.      Evaluate first aid intervention
 4.      Wind-up first aid intervention

 4.2.1 Learning Outcome 1:
 Assess the nature and extent of injury or illness

 4.2.1.1 Introduction to the learning outcome

 This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to assess the nature and
 extent of injury or illness. It includes principles of first aid, scene size up, assessment of nature
 and extent of injury and /or illness, sourcing for emergency services, decision making-triaging and
 requirements for first aid. Effective assessment of the nature and extent of injury or illness reduces
 the mortality rate by 75% in most of emergency cases.



 4.2.1.2 Performance Standard

1.    Assessed personal, casualty and environment safety as per principles of first aid.
2.    Assessed the nature and extent of injury and /or illness in accordance to first aid principles.
3.    Called assistance from emergency services as per first aid principles.
4.    Made a decision promptly regarding action to be taken.
5.    Identified tools, equipment, materials and supplies required based on the assessment carried
      out.
6.    Gathered tools, equipment, materials and supplies based on the assessment of the situation.

 4.2.1.3 Information Sheet

 Definition of Terms
 Casualty- the department of a hospital providing immediate treatment for emergency cases


                                                  xxxix
First Aid- is the first and immediate assistance given to any person suffering from either a minor
or serious illness or injury, with care provided to preserve life, prevent the condition from
worsening, or to promote recovery
Emergency services- are the public organizations whose job is to take quick action to deal with
emergencies when they occur, especially the fire brigade, the police, and the ambulance service.
Injury- also known as physical trauma is damage to the body caused by external force. This may
be caused by accidents, falls, hits, weapons, and other causes.

                                           Principles of first aid
Preserve Life
The first aim of first aid is to preserve life, which involves the key emergency practices to ensure
that the casualty isn’t in any mortal danger. Remember though, this includes preserving your own
life as you shouldn’t put yourself in danger in order to apply first aid. It’s at this stage where you
should do a quick risk assessment to check for dangers to the injured person, yourself or bystanders
which could cause the situation to escalate. If in doubt, do not attempt to apply first aid and
immediately call for a medical professional.

Prevent Deterioration
Once you’ve followed all the steps associated with the first principle, your next priority is to
prevent deterioration of the injured person’s condition. Keeping a casualty still to avoid
aggravating their injury, or from complicating any unseen issues, is crucial. This helps prevent to
further injuries, and clearing the area of any immediate dangers will help you to do so.

Promote Recovery
Finally, there are steps you should follow which will help lessen the amount of time taken for a
casualty to recover from an accident and aid in minimizing lasting damage and scarring. The prime
example of this is applying cold water to a burn as soon as possible to lower the chance of long-
term scarring and helps speed up the healing process.

                                           Scene Size-up

The scene size-up is performed as units first approach their call. While the activity is part of most
EMS training programs, it is often limited to the student asking: "I perform my scene size-up, what
do I see?" and then being given answers by a well-meaning instructor looking to move the scenario
along to the "important clinical part."

On the job, very few calls present consequences for the responder if a thorough scene size-up is
not performed; as a result, providers become complacent and out of practice. All skills in medicine
fade with disuse and many providers weren’t proficient at a scene size-up to begin with. More

                                                  xl
often than not, a cursory size-up is performed and rarely is it communicated to other responding
units.

Here are five tips for a more effective scene size-up to inform other EMS providers and initiate
effective incident management.

   1. PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT
Standardization is one of the common ways to increase safety and reduce the chance of an error.
Many new EMS providers are advised to perform their history and physical exam the same way
every time to reduce the chance of missing a portion of the assessment.




  Figure 6: What are your scene size-up tips?

  https://media.cdn.lexipol.com/article-images/fb-
  2ems1dblrslv.jpg?w=300&format=jpg&quality=87&crop=0%2C0%2C420%2C360

   2. COMMUNICATE EARLY, COMMUNICATE OFTEN
  As a general rule, EMS providers entered the industry to care for the sick and injured. As a
  result, on scenes where a size-up is most important, there are likely one or more patients who
  could really use your help. There is a drive among EMS providers to render aid as quickly as
  possible and while that goal is admirable it can get you into trouble.

   3. SAFETY FIRST


                                               xli
  Among the other often-recited phrases in EMS education is "scene safety, BSI." Think about all
  of the nearly automatic ways EMS providers protect themselves on a daily basis. Crews
  generally park at an accident scene so that a wayward driver would strike a heavy and
  unoccupied fire engine before the crews or the ambulance. In the winter, you may back up a
  patient’s driveway so that you don’t have to navigate a loaded gurney down a sheet of ice to the
  ambulance.
    4. A WAY IN AND A WAY OUT
  Identifying ingress and egress route serves both as a convenience and as a means to ensure
  provider safety. On a standard call, your ingress route is generally whatever street you happened
  to be driving down to get to the address and your egress route is simply continuing down that
  street but with a patient on board. In some cases, however, establishing ingress and egress routes
  may occur in conjunction with fire and law enforcement colleagues and communicating that to
  other units could be the difference between a successful or unsuccessful incident.
    5. ASK FOR HELP
  This tip actually serves two purposes. On scene when performing the size-up, close your initial
  communication to dispatch with a request for resources based on the estimated number and
  severity of patients. This means that you may cancel or downgrade responding units later as
  triage continues. Nothing confuses a request for resources more quickly than asking for "one
  more ambulance" several times in quick succession. You will lose track of what you’ve asked
  for and what is on the way and so will dispatch.

                         Assessment of nature and extent of injury and /or illness
Assessment of Injuries
The TOTAPS method (Talk, Observe, Touch, Active movement, Passive Movement, Skills Test)
is an effective way to assess the nature and extent of an injury to a player and make a decision as
to whether or not the athlete who is injured can resume playing.
Talk: The athlete should be asked a range of questions to establish what happened and how they
were feeling. Potential questions include: Where is the pain? Did you hear anything? What
happened to cause it? Is this the first time this has happened?
Observe: The injured site must be carefully inspected identify any signs of swelling and
deformity. It can help to compare the injured site to the other side of the body. (E.g., compare
one ankle to the other, to assess an ankle injury). Signs of deformity or swelling are an indication
of either soft or hard tissue damage, which means further assessment and treatment from a
professional is required.
Touch: If observation fails to yield results the next step involves feeling around the injured site
to identify any deformity or swelling. Gentle pressure should be applied from the outside of the
injury before slowly working in.
Active Movement: The athlete will need to test movement around the injured site by performing
actions such as flexion, extension and rotation to determine whether the mobility of the joint has
been affected. If there is no pain whilst the athlete is performing the movement by themselves
                                                xlii
then they need to complete an isometric contraction before the athlete can move ahead to the last
step. If the assessor feels that the athlete does not have a full range of movement, they should
progress to the next stage.
Passive Movement: If full range of movement is not evident, the assessor or sports trainer needs
to physically mobilize the joint to test the range of motion and identify any instability and painful
areas. The athlete must be watched to see if they exhibit signs of discomfort.
Skills Test: The final stage requires the athlete to complete sport specific movements that mimic
those which are performed during the game. For example, walking, jogging, side stepping,
changing direction and jumping. If the athlete can complete these and the assessor is satisfied,
then they can return to play. During this test the assessor must watch the athlete for any signs of
discomfort or favor towards one side. At this stage, strapping may be used to reinforce the
injured site.
The athlete must complete and pass all assessment procedures in order to be considered fit
enough to return to the playing field.
If the athlete is unable to complete any of the requirements from TOTAPS, then they should be
referred to a medical professional for further treatment. The assessment of the injury can be
stopped at any time if it is evident that the athlete is feeling pain and cannot return to the field.

       Sourcing for emergency services
When an emergency hits, simplified emergency procurement policies and procedures should be
enacted to ensure that procurement can be fast enough to meet the emergency needs while also
ensuring adequate levels of accountability.

Lessons learned have consistently demonstrated that in the first stages of an emergency, regular
organization procurement procedures are overly cumbersome or inadequate to deal with the fast-
paced and urgent demands required for emergency procurement. Simplified procedures must be
put in place for the emergency period, or considerable slowing of the procurement process will
result, which will delay the entire relief effort.

Decisions about what modifications to procedures will be applied in an emergency should ideally
be addressed through the EPP process and be able to be activated immediately when an
emergency is declared. The most effective organizations are those that already have emergency
procedures documented as part of their regular policies, and they simply need to activate them at
the time the emergency is declared.

       Decision making-Triaging

  Patient triage in Accident and Emergency departments requires emergency nurses to make rapid
  decisions based on their knowledge and experiences. The development of triage decision-
  making skills can be addressed through the use of simulations, 'thinking aloud' technique,

                                                xliii
reflection and the decision rules of experienced emergency nurses. Clinical educators and
experienced emergency nurse mentors are encouraged to recognize that skill acquisition in triage
decision making requires practice before registered nurses can engage fully in the process of
triaging patients in the emergency department. It is essential to experience the process of triage
decision making in order to develop an understanding of the clinical information attended to,
the sequence in which the information is processed and the rules used to combine information
leading to a decision on the triage category for each patient. By using triage simulations
developed from 'real triage cases' the process of decision making can be experienced by nurses.
Further, if these simulations are accompanied by the collection of verbal protocols, nurses have
opportunities retrospectively to explore their decision making with reflection. In addition, the
presentation and use of decision rules used by experienced triage nurses can enhance the
development of skills in novice triage nurses.
                                   Requirements for first aid




                                Figure 7: Workplace first aid kit

              https://www.ishn.com/ext/resources/todaysnews2/first-aid-kit-
                           422.jpg?t=1424199076&width=696

IN EXERCISE of the powers conferred by section 55 of the Factories
Act, the Minister for Labor after consulting the Labor Advisory Board
hereby makes the following Rules:-

THE FACTORIES (FIRST-AID) RULES
                                              xliv
In every factory there shall be provided, maintained and readily available and accessible in every
first aid box or cupboard required under section 50(1) of the Act items in accordance with the
following –
(a) In every factory in which the number of employees does not exceed ten—
      i.         a copy of the first-aid leaflet (L.D. 250/1) issued by the Labor Department;
     ii.         a sufficient number (not less than six) of small sterilized unmediated dressings
                 for injured fingers;
    iii.         a sufficient number (not less than three) of medium sized sterilized unmediated
                 dressing for injured hands or feet;
    iv.          a sufficient number (not less than three) of large sterilized unmediated dressings
                 for other injured parts;
     v.          a sufficient number (not less than twelve) of adhesive wound dressings of a
                 suitable type and of assorted sizes;
    vi.          a sufficient number (not less than two) of triangular bandages of unbleached
                 calico, the longest side of which measures not less than one hundred and thirty
                 centimeters and each of the other sides not less than ninety-one centimeters.;
   vii.          a sufficient supply of adhesive plaster;
  viii.          a sufficient supply of absorbent sterilized cotton wool in fourteen gramme
                 packets;
    ix.          a sufficient supply of Factory Eye Drops, B.P.C.;
     x.          a sufficient number (not less two) of sterilized eye pads in separate sealed
                 packets;
    xi.          a tourniquet; and a sufficient supply of safety pins;
(b) in every factory in which the number of employees exceeds ten but does not exceed
      fifty--
    i. a copy of the first-aid leaflet (L.D. 250/1) issued by the Labor Department;
   ii. a sufficient number (not less than twelve) of small sterilized unmediated dressings for
          injured fingers;
 iii. A sufficient number (not less than six) of medium sized sterilized unmediated dressing
          for injured hands or feet.
  iv.     a sufficient number (not less than six) of large sterilized unmediated dressings for other
          injured parts;
   v. a sufficient number (not less than twenty four) of adhesive wound dressings of a
          suitable type and of assorted sizes;
  vi.     a sufficient number (not less than four) of triangular bandages of unbleached calico, the
          longest side of which measures not less than one hundred and thirty centimeters and
          each of the other sides not less than ninety-one centimeters;
 vii.     a sufficient supply of adhesive plaster;
viii.     a sufficient supply of absorbent sterilized cotton wool in fourteen gram packets;
  ix. a sufficient supply of Factory Eye Drops
                                               xlv
   x. a sufficient number (not less four) of sterilized eye pads in separate sealed packets;
  xi. a tourniquet; and a sufficient supply of safety pins
(c) in every factory in which the number of employees exceeds fifty--
    i. a copy of the first-aid leaflet (L.D. 250/1) issued by the Labor Department;
   ii. a sufficient number (not less than twenty four) of small sterilized unmediated dressings
        for injured fingers;
 iii. A sufficient number (not less than twelve) of medium sized sterilized unmediated
        dressing for injured hands or feet.
  iv.   a sufficient number (not less than twelve) of large sterilized unmediated dressings for
        other injured parts;
   v. a sufficient number (not less than thirty six) of adhesive wound dressings of a suitable
        type and of assorted sizes;
  vi.   a sufficient number (not less than eight) of triangular bandages of unbleached calico,
        the longest side of which measures not less than one hundred and thirty centimeters
        and of the other sides not less than ninety-one centimeters;
 vii.   a sufficient supply of adhesive plaster;
viii.   a sufficient supply of absorbent sterilized cotton wool in fourteen gram packets;
  ix. a sufficient supply of Factory Eye Drops, B.P.C;
   x. a sufficient number (not less eight) of sterilized eye pads in separate sealed packets;
  xi. a tourniquet; and a sufficient supply of safety pins;
All materials for drugs and dressings contained in first aid boxes or cupboards shall be those
designated in, and of a grade or quality not lower than the standards specified by the British
Pharmaceutical Codex or any supplement thereof.
Every first aid box or cupboard shall be plainly and clearly marked on the outside with the words
“FIRST AID”.
In every factory where there are more than ten but less than fifty employees, there shall be at
least to persons trained in first aid and at least one such person shall always be available in the
factory at all times during all working hours.
In every factory where there are more than fifty but less than one hundred employees there shall
be at least three persons trained in first aid and at least one such person shall always be available
in the factory at all times during all working hours.
In every factory where there are more than one hundred employees there shall be at least three
persons trained in first aid, plus one additional person for each extra hundred employees (or part
thereof ) beyond the first 100 employees, and two such trained persons shall always be available
in the factory at all times during working hours.
In every factory where more than five hundred persons are employed there shall be a first aid
room which shall always be open and manned by a trained nurse during working hours.
No person shall be placed in charge of a first aid box or cupboard unless he or she has received
adequate training in the application of first-aid to the injured persons and holds a certificate of
competence issued by –
                                               xlvi
     i.   The St. John Ambulance of the St. John Council of Kenya, or
    ii.   The Kenya Red Cross Society, or
   iii.   Such other body or society as may be approved from time to time, by the Labor
          Commissioner:
  Provided that any certificate of competence issued in accordance with this paragraph shall be
  valid for one year only and must be renewed annually.
  The provisions of these Rules shall apply to both day and night shifts and during all hours a
  factory is open.
  Where offence is committed under these Rules, the owner or the occupier of the factory
  concerned, as the case may be, shall be guilty of an offence and if the provisions of Part XI of
  the Act as to offences, penalties (including the amounts thereof) and proceedings shall apply,
  mutatis mutandis, to these Rules as if they were set out there in.

4.2.1.3 Learning Activities

4.2.1.3.1 Practical Activities
1. Effective assessment of nature and extent of injury or illness is vital in preserving life of the
    casualties. Using the TOTAPS method demonstrate how you can assess the nature and extent
    of an injury to a player and make a decision as to whether or not the athlete who is injured
    can resume playing?
4.2.1.3.2 Self-Assessment
You are provided with the following questions for self-assessment, attempt them and check your
responses
1. You will be required to provide first aid services to a variety of patient. What are the
    principles of first aid?
2. What are the factors you need to consider for a more effective scene size-up to inform other
    emergency services providers and initiate effective incident management?
3. You are the first to reach to the scene of a patient involved in trauma. Primary survey in the
    management of trauma involves?
4. Sourcing for emergency services materials and equipment is very vital in the provision of
    emergency services. What is the importance of effective sourcing for emergency services
    materials and equipment?
5. Patient triage in Accident and Emergency departments requires emergency nurses to make
    rapid decisions based on their knowledge and experiences. Why is effective rapid decision
    making by nurses working in the patient triage in accident and emergency departments very
    important in saving the lives of the casualties?
6. According to the factories first aid rules, every factory in which the number of employees
    does not exceed ten should fulfill which requirements?
7. According to the factories first aid rules, every factory in which the number of employees
    exceeds ten but does not exceed fifty should fulfill which requirements?

                                                xlvii
4.2.1.4 Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials
   Casualty department
   Functional skills laboratory
   First aid kit
   Emergency room
   Emergency room standard manuals
   Emergency trolley
   First Aid Manual.
   Tweezers
   Alcohol Swabs
     Antibiotic Ointment
     Bandages
     Gauze Pads
     Medical Tape
     Elastic Bandages
     Pain relievers
     Instant cold pack
     Waste disposal bins
     Personal protective equipment
     Health workers
     Presentation charts
     Flip charts




                                          xlviii
4.2.1.5 References

Jevon, P. & Ewens, B. (2012) Monitoring the Critically Ill Patient, 3rd Edition, Wiley-Blackwell,
Oxford

Peitzman A.B., et al. (2012) The Trauma Manual, 2nd edition. Philadelphia, Pa., Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.

Rapid Response to Everyday Emergencies (2016) A Nurse's Guide. Philadelphia, Pa., Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.

Royal College of nursing (2017) Record Keeping: The Facts, RCN, viewed 28 May
2018, https://www.rcn.org.uk/professional-development/publications/pub-006051




                                              xlix
  MODEL ANSWERS

Self-Assessment

1. You will be required to provide first aid services to a variety of patient. What are the
   principles of first aid?
    Preserve Life--The first aim of first aid is to preserve life, which involves the key
      emergency practices to ensure that the casualty isn’t in any mortal danger.
    Prevent Deterioration--Once you’ve followed all the steps associated with the first
      principle, your next priority is to prevent deterioration of the injured person’s condition.
      Keeping a casualty still to avoid aggravating their injury, or from complicating any
      unseen issues, is crucial.
    Promote Recovery--Finally, there are steps you should follow which will help lessen the
      amount of time taken for a casualty to recover from an accident and aid in minimizing
      lasting damage and scarring.
2. What are the factors you need to consider for a more effective scene size-up to inform
   other emergency services providers and initiate effective incident management?
           Practice makes perfect--Standardization is one of the common ways to increase
            safety and reduce the chance of an error. Many new emergency service providers are
            advised to perform their history and physical exam the same way every time to
            reduce the chance of missing a portion of the assessment.
           Communicate early, communicate often—Early and often communication by the
            emergency service providers about the scene size up help to secure the emergency
            scene and reduce significantly morbidity and mortality rate of the casualties.
           Safety first-- Among the other often-recited phrases in emergency service education
            is "scene safety." Think about all of the nearly automatic ways emergency service
            providers protect themselves on a daily basis.
           A way in and a way out-- Identifying ingress and egress route serves both as a
            convenience and as a means to ensure provider safety. On a standard call, your
            ingress route is generally whatever street you happened to be driving down to get to
            the address and your egress route is simply continuing down that street but with a
            patient on board.
           Ask for help-- This tip actually serves two purposes. On scene when performing the
            size-up, close your initial communication to dispatch with a request for resources
            based on the estimated number and severity of patients. This means that you may
            cancel or downgrade responding units later as triage continues. Nothing confuses a
            request for resources more quickly than asking for "one more ambulance" several
            times in quick succession. You will lose track of what you’ve asked for and what is
            on the way and so will dispatch.

                                                l
3. You are the first to reach to the scene of a patient involved in trauma. Primary survey
   in the management of trauma involves?
    Airway-- open the patient's airway using a jaw-thrust maneuver with manual, in-line
       stabilization of the neck. If you find food, blood, vomitus, or other debris, suction the
       airway quickly to prevent aspiration. To better remove secretions, you may need to
       carefully logroll the patient to his side. Manually stabilize his neck and spine as you do
       so.
    Breathing-- Note respiratory rate and depth, chest expansion, and accessory muscle use
       and auscultate breath sounds bilaterally. Also palpate for crepitus or subcutaneous air in
       the neck and chest, which can indicate a pneumothorax or airway injury.
    Circulation--Once you've assessed and supported your patient's breathing, attend to his
       circulatory status. Assess for the presence and quality of peripheral pulses to quickly
       estimate blood pressure
    Disability--To evaluate disability, you'll evaluate the patient's LOC, pupil response, and
       gross sensorimotor function. To document his baseline LOC, quickly assess and record
       an initial GCS score.
    Exposure--The final component of the primary survey is exposure. Remove the patient's
       clothing completely so you can inspect his entire body for injuries. Use good judgment
       when removing clothing; trying to remove a shirt by pulling or manipulating it may
       worsen the injury or pain. Cutting clothing away with trauma shears is usually best.
4. Sourcing for emergency services materials and equipment is very vital in the provision
   of emergency services. What is the importance of effective sourcing for emergency
   services materials and equipment?
         When an emergency hits, simplified emergency procurement policies and procedures
          should be enacted to ensure that procurement can be fast enough to meet the
          emergency needs while also ensuring adequate levels of accountability.
         Lessons learned have consistently demonstrated that in the first stages of an
          emergency, regular organization procurement procedures are overly cumbersome or
          inadequate to deal with the fast-paced and urgent demands required for emergency
          procurement. Simplified procedures must be put in place for the emergency period, or
          considerable slowing of the procurement process will result, which will delay the
          entire relief effort.
         Decisions about what modifications to procedures will be applied in an emergency
          should ideally be addressed through the emergency procurement procedures process
          and be able to be activated immediately when an emergency is declared. The most
          effective organizations are those that already have emergency procedures documented
          as part of their regular policies, and they simply need to activate them at the time the
          emergency is declared.
5. Patient triage in Accident and Emergency departments requires emergency nurses to
   make rapid decisions based on their knowledge and experiences. Why is effective rapid
                                                 li
   decision making by nurses working in the patient triage in accident and emergency
   departments very important in saving the lives of the casualties?
           The development of triage decision-making skills can be addressed through the use
            of simulations, 'thinking aloud' technique, reflection and the decision rules of
            experienced emergency nurses.
           Clinical educators and experienced emergency nurse mentors are encouraged to
            recognize that skill acquisition in triage decision making requires practice before
            registered nurses can engage fully in the process of triaging patients in the
            emergency department.
           It is essential to experience the process of triage decision making in order to develop
            an understanding of the clinical information attended to, the sequence in which the
            information is processed and the rules used to combine information leading to a
            decision on the triage category for each patient.
           By using triage simulations developed from 'real triage cases' the process of decision
            making can be experienced by nurses.
           Further, if these simulations are accompanied by the collection of verbal protocols,
            nurses have opportunities retrospectively to explore their decision making with
            reflection.
           In addition, the presentation and use of decision rules used by experienced triage
            nurses can enhance the development of skills in novice triage nurses.
6. According to the factories first aid rules, every factory in which the number of
   employees does not exceed ten should fulfill which requirements?
    a copy of the first-aid leaflet (L.D. 250/1) issued by the Labor Department;
    a sufficient number (not less than six) of small sterilized unmediated dressings for injured
      fingers;
    a sufficient number (not less than three) of medium sized sterilized unmediated dressing
      for injured hands or feet;
    a sufficient number (not less than three) of large sterilized unmediated dressings for other
      injured parts;
    a sufficient number (not less than twelve) of adhesive wound dressings of a suitable type
      and of assorted sizes;
    a sufficient number (not less than two) of triangular bandages of unbleached calico, the
      longest side of which measures not less than one hundred and thirty centimeters and each
      of the other sides not less than ninety-one centimeters.;
    a sufficient supply of adhesive plaster;
    a sufficient supply of absorbent sterilized cotton wool in fourteen gramme packets;
    a sufficient supply of Factory Eye Drops, B.P.C.;
    a sufficient number (not less two) of sterilized eye pads in separate sealed packets;
    a tourniquet; and a sufficient supply of safety pins;
                                                lii
7. According to the factories first aid rules, every factory in which the number of
   employees exceeds ten but does not exceed fifty should fulfill which requirements?
    a copy of the first-aid leaflet (L.D. 250/1) issued by the Labor Department;
    a sufficient number (not less than twelve) of small sterilized unmediated dressings for
      injured fingers;
    A sufficient number (not less than six) of medium sized sterilized unmediated dressing
      for injured hands or feet.
    a sufficient number (not less than six) of large sterilized unmediated dressings for other
      injured parts;
    a sufficient number (not less than twenty four) of adhesive wound dressings of a suitable
      type and of assorted sizes;
    a sufficient number (not less than four) of triangular bandages of unbleached calico, the
      longest side of which measures not less than one hundred and thirty centimeters and each
      of the other sides not less than ninety-one centimeters;
    a sufficient supply of adhesive plaster;
    a sufficient supply of absorbent sterilized cotton wool in fourteen gram packets;
    a sufficient supply of Factory Eye Drops
    a sufficient number (not less four) of sterilized eye pads in separate sealed packets;
    a tourniquet; and a sufficient supply of safety pins




                                              liii
 4.2.1 Learning Outcome 2:
 Provide first aid intervention

 4.2.1.1 Introduction to the learning outcome

 This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to provide first aid
 interventions. It includes performing cardio- pulmonary resuscitation; management of: choking,
 burns and scalds, trauma, nose bleeding, cuts, fractures, drowning, poisoning and snake bites,
 assisting patients with medical conditions such as: asthma, epilepsy and diabetes, effective
 communication on casualty’s condition, handing over casualty to medical personnel and
 monitoring Casualty’s condition.



 4.2.1.2 Performance Standard

1.   Gave specific first aid measures based on nature and extent of injury/illness
2.   Monitored casualty’s condition continuously based on the vital signs
3.   Conveyed information on the casualty condition accurately and clearly to emergency services
     personnel
4.   Handed over the casualty to the emergency and appropriate medical personnel

 4.2.1.3 Information Sheet

 Definition of Terms
 Cardio- pulmonary resuscitation- Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) is an emergency
 procedure that combines chest compressions often with artificial ventilation in an effort to
 manually preserve intact brain function until further measures are taken to restore spontaneous
 blood circulation and breathing in a person who is in cardiac arrest.
 Casualty- the department of a hospital providing immediate treatment for emergency cases
 First Aid- is the first and immediate assistance given to any person suffering from either a minor
 or serious illness or injury, with care provided to preserve life, prevent the condition from
 worsening, or to promote recovery
 Emergency services- are the public organizations whose job is to take quick action to deal with
 emergencies when they occur, especially the fire brigade, the police, and the ambulance service.
 Injury- also known as physical trauma is damage to the body caused by external force. This may
 be caused by accidents, falls, hits, weapons, and other causes.
                               Performing cardio- pulmonary resuscitation
 Using the CPR steps on someone who is not breathing can help keep them alive until the
 emergency services arrive.

                                                liv
CPR works by keeping a person’s blood flowing until healthcare professionals can help them.
People without first aid training can still save a life by using the CPR steps.
When a person initiates CPR immediately after someone’s heart stops beating, CPR can double
or even triple the chances of them surviving.
                                              CPR step-by-step
There are two main stages to CPR: the preparation stage and the CPR stage.
Preparation steps
Before performing CPR on an adult, use the following preparation steps:

Step 1 Call 911

First, check the scene for factors that could put you in danger, such as traffic, fire, or falling
masonry. Next, check the person. Do they need help? Tap their shoulder and shout, “Are you
OK?”
If they are not responding, call 911 or ask a bystander to call 911 before performing CPR. If
possible, ask a bystander to go and search for an AED machine. People can find these in offices
and many other public buildings.

Step 2 Place the person on their back and open their airway
Place the person carefully on their back and kneel beside their chest. Tilt their head back slightly
by lifting their chin.
Open their mouth and check for any obstruction, such as food or vomit. Remove any obstruction
if it is loose. If it is not loose, trying to grasp it may push it farther into the airway.

Step 3 Check for breathing
Place your ear next the person’s mouth and listen for no more than 10 seconds. If you do not hear
breathing, or you only hear occasional gasps, begin CPR.
If someone is unconscious but still breathing, do not perform CPR. Instead, if they do not seem
to have a spinal injury, place them in the recovery position. Keep monitoring their breathing and
perform CPR if they stop breathing.

CPR steps
Use the following steps to perform CPR:

Step 4 Perform 30 chest compressions
Place one of your hands on top of the other and clasp them together. With the heel of the hands
and straight elbows, push hard and fast in the center of the chest, slightly below the nipples.
Push at least 2 inches deep. Compress their chest at a rate of least 100 times per minute. Let the
chest rise fully between compressions.


                                                 lv
  Figure 8: Chest compressions techniques

  https://cdn-prod.medicalnewstoday.com/content/images/articles/324/324712/chest-
  compressions-in-cpr-visual-guide-infographic.jpg

Step 5 Perform two rescue breaths
Making sure their mouth is clear, tilt their head back slightly and lift their chin. Pinch their nose
shut, place your mouth fully over theirs, and blow to make their chest rise.
If their chest does not rise with the first breath, retilt their head. If their chest still does not rise
with a second breath, the person might be choking.




                                                    lvi
       Figure 9: Rescue breaths


       https://cdn-prod.medicalnewstoday.com/content/images/articles/324/324712/cpr-rescue-
       breaths-visual-guide-illustration.jpg


Step 6 Repeat
Repeat the cycle of 30 chest compressions and two rescue breaths until the person starts
breathing or help arrives. If an AED arrives, carry on performing CPR until the machine is set up
and ready to use.




                                               lvii
  Figure 10: How to Do CPR - Step by Step Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation


       https://www.trainingexpress.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/How-to-Do-CPR-Step-
       1-e1581920675299.jpg




                                        Management of: Choking

Choking happens when someone's airway suddenly gets blocked, either fully or partly, so they
can't breathe.

This information applies to adults and children over 1 year old.

                              Mild choking: encourage them to cough
If the airway is only partly blocked, the person will usually be able to speak, cry, cough or
breathe.

They'll usually be able to clear the blockage themselves.

To help with mild choking in an adult or child over 1 year old:
                                                lviii
      encourage them to keep coughing to try to clear the blockage
      ask them to try to spit out the object if it's in their mouth
      don't put your fingers in their mouth to help them as they may bite you accidentally
If coughing doesn't work, start back blows.

                       Severe choking: back blows and abdominal thrusts
Where choking is severe, the person won't be able to speak, cry, cough or breathe. Without help,
they'll eventually become unconscious.

To carry out a back blow on an adult or child over 1 year old:

      Stand behind them and slightly to one side. Support their chest with 1 hand. Lean them
       forward so the object blocking their airway will come out of their mouth, rather than
       moving further down.
      Give up to 5 sharp blows between their shoulder blades with the heel of your hand. The
       heel is between the palm of your hand and your wrist.
      Check if the blockage has cleared.
    If not, give up to 5 abdominal thrusts.
  Abdominal thrusts

Don't give abdominal thrusts to babies under 1 year old or pregnant women.

To carry out an abdominal thrust:

      Stand behind the person who's choking.
      Place your arms around their waist and bend them forward.
      Clench 1 fist and place it right above their belly button.
      Put the other hand on top of your fist and pull sharply inwards and upwards.
       Repeat this movement up to 5 times.
If the person's airway is still blocked after trying back blows and abdominal thrusts, get help
immediately:

      Call 999 and ask for an ambulance. Tell the 999 operator the person is choking.
      Continue with the cycles of 5 back blows and 5 abdominal thrusts until help arrives.


                                                  lix
If they lose consciousness and aren't breathing, you should begin cardiopulmonary resuscitation
(CPR) with chest compressions.

                                  Complications of Choking
Get urgent medical help at an A&E, NHS walk-in centre or a GP if:

      they have a persistent cough after choking
     they feel something is still stuck in their throat
Abdominal thrusts can cause serious injuries. A health professional such as your GP or a doctor
in A&E should always examine someone after they have received abdominal thrusts.



                                      Management of Burns and Scalds

                                     About burns and scalds




  Figure 11: Burns and Scalds

https://assets.nhs.uk/nhsuk-cms/images/C0034381.width-320.jpg

Burns and scalds are damage to the skin caused by heat. Both are treated in the same way.

A burn is caused by dry heat – by an iron or fire, for example. A scald is caused by something
wet, such as hot water or steam.
                                               lx
Burns can be very painful and may cause:

   red or peeling skin
   blisters
   swelling
  white or charred skin
The amount of pain you feel isn't always related to how serious the burn is. Even a very serious
burn may be relatively painless.

                                       Treating burns and scalds
To treat a burn, follow the first aid advice below:

   immediately get the person away from the heat source to stop the burning
   cool the burn with cool or lukewarm running water for 20 minutes – don't use ice, iced water,
    or any creams or greasy substances such as butter
   remove any clothing or jewellery that's near the burnt area of skin, including babies' nappies
    - but don't move anything that's stuck to the skin
   make sure the person keeps warm – by using a blanket, for example, but take care not to rub
    it against the burnt area
   cover the burn by placing a layer of cling film over it – a clean plastic bag could also be used
    for burns on your hand
   use painkillers such as paracetamol or ibuprofen to treat any pain
  if the face or eyes are burnt, sit up as much as possible, rather than lying down - this helps to
   reduce swelling
The British Red Cross website has a video about first aid for burns.

                                  When to get medical attention
Depending on how serious a burn is, it may be possible to treat it at home. For minor burns, keep
the burn clean and don't burst any blisters that form.

More serious burns require professional medical attention. You should go to a hospital A&E
department for:

   all chemical and electrical burns
   large or deep burns – any burn bigger than your hand
   burns that cause white or charred skin – any size
   burns on the face, hands, arms, feet, legs or genitals that cause blisters

                                                  lxi
If someone has breathed in smoke or fumes, they should also seek medical attention. Some
symptoms may be delayed and can include:

   coughing
   a sore throat
   difficulty breathing
  facial burns
People at greater risk from the effects of burns, such as children under five years old and
pregnant women, should also get medical attention after a burn or scald.

The size and depth of the burn will be assessed and the affected area cleaned before a dressing is
applied. In severe cases, skin graft surgery may be recommended.

                                         Types of burn
Burns are assessed by how seriously your skin is damaged and which layers of skin are affected.
Your skin has three layers:

   the epidermis – the outer layer of skin
   the dermis – the layer of tissue just beneath, which contains blood capillaries, nerve endings,
    sweat glands and hair follicles
  the subcutaneous fat, or subcutis – the deeper layer of fat and tissue
There are four main types of burn, which tend to have a different appearance and different
symptoms:

       superficial epidermal burn – where the epidermis is damaged; your skin will be red,
        slightly swollen and painful, but not blistered
       superficial dermal burn – where the epidermis and part of the dermis are damaged; your
        skin will be pale pink and painful, and there may be small blisters
       deep dermal or partial thickness burn – where the epidermis and the dermis are damaged:
        this type of burn makes your skin turn red and blotchy; your skin may be dry or moist,
        and become swollen and blistered, and it may be very painful or painless
       full thickness burn – where all three layers of skin (the epidermis, dermis and subcutis)
        are damaged; the skin is often burnt away and the tissue underneath may appear pale or
        blackened, while the remaining skin will be dry and white, brown or black with no
        blisters, and the texture of the skin may also be leathery or waxy
                                      Preventing burns and scalds
Many severe burns and scalds affect babies and young children. Examples of things you can do
to help reduce the likelihood of your child having a serious accident at home include:

                                                lxii
   keeping your child out of the kitchen whenever possible
   testing the temperature of bath water using your elbow before you put your baby or toddler in
    the bath
   keeping matches, lighters and lit candles out of young children's sight and reach
   keeping hot drinks well away from young children

                                              Management of Trauma
                           Primary Survey: Managing immediate threats
By taking a standardized approach to assessment and treatment, the trauma team can address the
most significant risks to life first. As always, start with the ABCs.


Airway. The first part of the primary survey is always assessing the airway. This includes
checking for potential injury to the cervical spine. Until cervical spine injury has been ruled out,
open the patient's airway using a jaw-thrust maneuver with manual, in-line stabilization of the
neck. If you find food, blood, vomitus, or other debris, suction the airway quickly to prevent
aspiration. To better remove secretions, you may need to carefully logroll the patient to his side.
Manually stabilize his neck and spine as you do so.



Breathing. Assess your patient's breathing next. Note respiratory rate and depth, chest
expansion, and accessory muscle use and auscultate breath sounds bilaterally. Also palpate for
crepitus or subcutaneous air in the neck and chest, which can indicate a pneumothorax or airway
injury. Find out if he has pain with breathing or on palpation. Injuries that can impair ventilation
include rib fractures (especially a flail chest), a pneumothorax, a hemothorax, and spinal cord or
head trauma.


Supplemental oxygen is always indicated at this stage. For a spontaneously breathing patient, a
non-rebreather mask with the flow rate set at 12 to 15 liters/minute is appropriate. However, if
the patient isn't breathing well enough to sustain optimal oxygenation, begin manual bag-valve-
mask ventilation to support his ventilatory efforts until he can be intubated and mechanically
ventilated.


If the patient has severe respiratory distress and hypotension as well as unilateral decreased or
absent breath sounds, suspect a tension pneumothorax, a potentially fatal complication requiring
rapid treatment. To perform an emergency chest decompression, the trauma team physician will
perform a needle thoracostomy, inserting a 14-gauge I.V. catheter into the patient's chest at the
second intercostal space, midclavicular line on the affected side. A rush of air from the catheter
                                                 lxiii
confirms the presence of a tension pneumothorax. The catheter is left in place until a chest tube
can be inserted.
 In the meantime, a syringe or commercial Heimlich valve (or similar device) is attached to the
catheter hub so that air can escape without being drawn back into the chest. If available, have a
chest tube drainage system that can collect blood for autotransfusion on hand during chest tube
insertion, in case a hemothorax is present.
 Circulation. Once you've assessed and supported your patient's breathing, attend to his
circulatory status. Assess for the presence and quality of peripheral pulses to quickly estimate
BP, as follows.

       If he has a radial pulse, his systolic BP is at least 80 mm Hg.
        If he's lost his radial pulse but still has a femoral pulse, he has a systolic BP of at least 70
         mm Hg.
     If he lacks all pulses except a carotid pulse, he has a systolic BP of at least 60 mm Hg.
 Note the patient's skin color and level of consciousness (LOC). Pallor and cold, clammy skin
indicate shock.
His LOC is an important indicator of cerebral perfusion. Agitation is common in the early stages
of shock. (Think of the "fight or flight" response.) As shock progresses, his LOC will decline
until he's unconscious.
 Obtain a complete set of vital signs, including temperature, as soon as possible. Use this set of
vital signs as a baseline for comparison with subsequent measurements. You may need to take
vital signs every 5 to 15 minutes until the patient's condition improves.
 A key part of your circulatory assessment is to identify and control hemorrhage. External
hemorrhage is usually, but not always, obvious. Logroll the patient to inspect his back and
buttocks for bleeding.

To control bleeding, apply direct pressure over the site of hemorrhage. If this isn't effective by
itself, apply pressure over the major arterial pulse point proximal to the bleeding site.
Use a tourniquet only if you must stanch severe hemorrhage in an extremity to save the patient's
life. Using a tourniquet puts the limb's viability at risk.
 Next, ask yourself if the mechanism of injury makes internal hemorrhage likely. If the patient
 has signs and symptoms of shock without visible bleeding, he may have an occult internal
 hemorrhage that requires surgery.
 Besides assessing and documenting his circulatory status, you may need to intervene to sustain
 circulation. For a patient who's in shock, consider both noninvasive and invasive strategies to
 support his BP. Keep him supine and elevate his legs 6 to 8 inches (15 to 20 cm) to promote
 venous return and improve cardiac output. Don't put him in the Trendelenburg position because
 this can cause his stomach to compress his diaphragm, impairing ventilation.

                                                   lxiv
 Make sure he has venous access with two large-bore I.V. catheters (ideally 14- to 16-gauge) to
 facilitate rapid fluid and blood product administration if needed. Draw blood for lab analysis.
 Send specimens for typing and crossmatching, complete blood cell count, serum glucose,
 electrolytes, and a coagulation profile. Depending on the patient's condition and suspected
 injuries, you may also need specimens for other studies, such as creatine kinase, amylase, and
 serum lactate.
 An arterial blood gas (ABG) analysis can help clinicians assess the patient's oxygenation status
 and determine whether or not he's in shock. If ABG results show a base deficit that's greater
 than 2 mEq/liter, suspect ongoing hemorrhage, internal injuries, or insufficient resuscitation.
 As ordered, administer an appropriate crystalloid solution for I.V. volume replacement, such as
 0.9% sodium chloride or lactated Ringer's solution. Warm the solution in a commercial fluid
 warmer or use a high-volume infuser/warming device. Don't administer D5W for volume
 replacement because the dextrose will be metabolized and leave free water, a hypotonic solution
 that won't stay in the vascular space.
 Provide 3 mL of crystalloid solution to replace each 1 mL of blood lost. If you infuse 2 liters of
 crystalloid solution and the patient's BP hasn't returned to the normal range, be prepared to
 administer blood products.
Typing and crossmatching typically take 30 to 40 minutes, which may be too long for a trauma
 patient to wait. When immediate blood transfusion is needed, the only option is to give
 uncrossmatched universal donor blood, as ordered. Give group O, Rh-negative packed red blood
 cells (RBCs) to female patients of childbearing age or younger. Male patients and women who
 can't become pregnant can receive group O, Rh-positive blood. Remember that 0.9% sodium
 chloride is the only solution you can infuse in the same I.V. line as blood.
Disability--To evaluate disability, you'll evaluate the patient's LOC, pupil response, and gross
sensorimotor function. To document his baseline LOC, quickly assess and record an initial GCS
score. If possible, determine his GCS before he receives any drugs that could alter his LOC to
better enable you to predict his outcome. For example, if a patient's GCS score on arrival at the
hospital is 4, his prognosis for recovery is much worse than a patient whose initial score is 12.
Keep in mind that accurate scoring can be impaired by traumatic, toxic, and metabolic causes.
Even if the patient shows evidence of alcohol or drug use, never assume that his altered mental
status is due purely to intoxicants until injury and other medical causes are ruled out. (See Using
the Glasgow Coma Scale.)
Note whether the patient can recall the events surrounding the traumatic event. Amnesia about
the event suggests that he lost consciousness.
Next, assess his pupils for size, equality, shape, and response to light. Unequal or abnormal pupil
response can indicate direct ocular trauma or head injury and elevated intracranial pressure or
the effects of drugs, such as atropine (pupil dilation) or opioids (pupil constriction).
The final component of the disability evaluation is an assessment of gross sensorimotor function.
Try to determine if the patient has any numbness, tingling, or other abnormal sensations in his

                                                lxv
body after the traumatic event and if he can move his limbs. Injuries to the extremities, spinal
cord, head, blood vessels, or nerves can cause sensorimotor deficits.
Exposure--The final component of the primary survey is exposure. Remove the patient's
clothing completely so you can inspect his entire body for injuries. Use good judgment when
removing clothing; trying to remove a shirt by pulling or manipulating it may worsen the injury
or pain. Cutting clothing away with trauma shears is usually best.
Once you've removed clothing, protect the patient from hypothermia, which is particularly
dangerous to any trauma patient because it impairs blood coagulation, interferes with
resuscitation efforts, and increases the risk of acidosis and death.
Take these measures to prevent heat loss and rewarm the patient.




  Table 1: The Glasgow Coma Scale


  https://biologydictionary.net/wp-content/uploads/2020/10/gcs.jpg


                                               lxvi
*Remove wet clothing and sheets. Cover the patient with warm blankets.


* Increase the room temperature to 75[degrees] F to 80[degrees] F (23.9[degrees] C to
26.7[degrees] C).


* Infuse only warm crystalloid solutions.


* Consider using commercial patient-warming devices, such as heat lights or temperature-
regulating blankets.
                       Secondary survey: Uncovering other serious threats
Once you've completed the primary survey and managed any immediate threats to the patient's
life, begin a secondary survey for injuries that could kill or disable him later. Start at his head
and assess him methodically, moving down his body systematically as you search for injuries.
Inspect for contusions, abrasions, lacerations, deformities, discoloration, edema, foreign bodies,
and other abnormalities.
Auscultate breath sounds and heart sounds. Assess all body areas to locate areas of pain or
tenderness, crepitus, deformity, loss of function, and the location and quality of pulses. If you
suspect he has a fracture of an arm or leg, assess the neurovascular status of the limb, then splint
it to prevent movement and decrease pain. Assess neurovascular status again after splinting.
Administer I.V. opioid analgesia as ordered and make sure that pain is managed optimally.
At this point, the trauma physician will consider ordering an indwelling urinary catheter to
accurately measure urinary output, an indication of renal perfusion, and to check for blood in the
urine. First, though, he'll perform a rectal examination to check for blood or evidence of urethral
injury, such as a high-riding prostate gland in a male patient. (If the urethra is injured, the patient
may need to have a suprapubic catheter inserted instead.)
Before inserting a urinary catheter, look for blood at the urethral meatus. If you see blood, notify
the physician and don't insert the catheter. The patient will need further diagnostic testing (for
instance, a retrograde urethrogram or cystogram) before a catheter can be safely inserted.




                                                 lxvii
  Figure 12: Responding to trauma: Your priorities in the first hour

https://www.nursingcenter.com/wkhlrp/handlers/Cv.png?key=article_TTU2_01244666-
200901000-00010




Reassess the patient's vital signs and GCS score as frequently as needed, depending on his
condition. Also try to obtain a more complete history from the patient or significant others. Use
the mnemonic "AMPLE" to help you remember the key information to gather. (See Get AMPLE
information.)
Assess carefully for medications the patient has taken that could affect his condition and
treatment. For example, taking an anticoagulant, such as warfarin, or a platelet inhibitor, such as
daily aspirin therapy, will make him much more prone to bleeding from his injuries. If he's using
any of these drugs, tell the health care provider immediately so that he can order appropriate
reversal agents or take measures to counteract anticoagulation effects.
Assess the patient for steroid use. If he's taking a steroid medication, he many need an I.V.
steroid bolus so that he can physiologically respond in a stress or shock state. If you don't know
the date of his last tetanus immunization or if it was more than 5 years ago, administer tetanus
prophylaxis.
Michael's secondary survey is remarkable for pain on palpation in his lumbar spine, tenderness
and abrasions over his left lower rib cage anteriorly, and heel pain and swelling in both feet. You
insert a urinary catheter and perform a dipstick urine test, which is positive for a small amount of
blood.
                                                lxviii
                                   Next up: An eye on Diagnostics
After the primary and secondary surveys are complete, prepare your patient for a series of X-rays
and scans. He'll have a stat portable chest X-ray to identify rib fractures or mediastinal or
diaphragmatic injury and to assess for a pneumothorax or hemothorax. He'll also need a cervical
spine X-ray series to check for cervical spine injury. The X-ray will also confirm the correct
position of chest and endotracheal tubes and central venous catheters. Depending on the results
of the primary and secondary surveys, he may have additional X-rays of the pelvis, spine,
extremities, or other areas.
 He may have bedside ultrasonography with the focused abdominal sonography for trauma
 (FAST) technique, which is used to rapidly examine all four abdominal quadrants and the
 pericardium to identify the presence of free fluid, usually blood.
If he's lost consciousness or shows evidence of a head injury, he'll need a computed tomography
 (CT) scan of his head. Other CT scans of the spine, chest, abdomen, or pelvis may be indicated
 to help the health care provider plan treatment.
Your patient may need a vascular ultrasound or an arteriogram if he has vascular injuries,
decreased or absent pulses, evidence of limb ischemia, or a widened mediastinum, indicating a
possible aortic injury.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is rarely used for diagnosing acutely injured patients
because it takes too long and safely placing an injured patient into the MRI tube is difficult. In
addition, the patient might have ferrous metal in his body (for example, implants, or metal
fragments left in his eyes from industrial work). Any ferrous metal is dangerous in an MRI room
and is a contraindication for MRI.
However, the patient may need an MRI if he shows any evidence of an acute spinal cord injury.
Be sure to carefully assess him for ferrous metal objects. If they can be removed, do so before
taking him to the MRI. The technologist will ask him if he has any implants or fragments in his
eyes from metal work. If he does, an MRI is contraindicated.
Michael's diagnostic workup includes a bedside FAST examination; chest, pelvis, and lower
extremity X-rays; a full series of spinal X-rays; and CT scans of his chest, abdomen, and lumbar
spine. The tests identify these injuries: fractures of the 9th and 10th ribs on the left side, an L3
compression fracture, bilateral calcaneus fractures, a renal contusion, and a grade III spleen
injury.

                                     Providing Definitive Care
The definitive care phase begins after the patient's injuries have been identified and initial
lifesaving interventions have been performed. If your hospital doesn't have the resources to
provide the care he needs, he may need to be transferred to a trauma center.



                                                lxix
In a facility that can provide trauma management, the patient may go to the operating room,
intensive care unit (ICU), or a surgical unit after his trauma workup. Most patients go home after
discharge, but some require inpatient rehabilitation first.
In Michael's case, the surgeon admits him to the ICU for close monitoring and pain management.
She elects to manage his spleen injury nonoperatively because his vital signs normalized after he
received 2 liters of resuscitation fluids. His rib fractures and renal contusion require only
observation at this time. Orthopedic and spine surgeons are consulted to treat his calcaneus
fractures and L3 compression fracture.

                                  Meeting the Standard of Care
Key outcome measures will help you to determine how well the patient has responded to
resuscitation and help you anticipate his needs. (See Adequate resuscitation? Watch for these
indicators.)
An organized team approach in the first hour after a traumatic injury provides fast, efficient
patient care and saves lives. Because you and other team members prioritized assessment and
interventions for Michael according to recognized standards of trauma care, you've given him the
best chance for survival and a full recovery.

                    Adequate Resuscitation? Watch for these indicators
      Hemodynamic and renal parameters within normal limits
      Core body temperature normal
      Serum lactate less than 2 mmol/liter
      No base deficit
      Arterial pH of 7.35 to 7.45
      Hemoglobin greater than 9 grams/dL (based on individual needs)
      Ionized calcium within normal limits. (Blood transfusion can lower serum calcium
       because of the calcium-binding effects of the citrate preservative in banked blood
       products.)
      Serum potassium of 3.5 to 5.3 mEq/liter
      Coagulation profile within normal limits
      Pain under control


                                Management of Nose Bleeding

                                        About nosebleeds
                                               lxx
    Figure 13: Nose Bleeds First Aid

https://ebgh.med.sa/wpcontent/uploads/2017/10/%D8%A7%D9%84%D8%B1%D8%B9%D8%
A7%D9%81-400x280.jpg?i=56491




Nosebleeds can be frightening, but they aren't usually a sign of anything serious and can often be
treated at home.

The medical name for a nosebleed is epistaxis.

During a nosebleed, blood flows from one or both nostrils. It can be heavy or light and last from
a few seconds to 15 minutes or more.

                                              What to do
To stop a nosebleed:

    sit down and firmly pinch the soft part of your nose, just above your nostrils, for at least 10-
     15 minutes

                                                  lxxi
   lean forward and breathe through your mouth – this will drain blood into your nose instead of
    down the back of your throat
   place an ice pack or bag of frozen vegetables covered by a towel on the bridge of your nose
    stay upright, rather than lying down, as this reduces the blood pressure in the blood vessels of
     your nose and will discourage further bleeding
If the bleeding eventually stops, you won't usually need to seek medical advice. However, in
some cases you may need further treatment from your doctor or in hospital (see below).

Read more about treating nosebleeds

                                   When to seek medical advice
Contact your Doctor if:

   you're taking a blood-thinning medicine (anticoagulant) such as warfarin or have a clotting
    disorder such as haemophilia and the bleeding doesn't stop
   you have symptoms of anaemia such as heart palpitations, shortness of breath and a pale
    complexion
   a child under two years of age has a nosebleed
   you have nosebleeds that come and go regularly
Ask someone to drive you to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department or call 999
for an ambulance if:

       the bleeding continues for longer than 20 minutes
       the bleeding is heavy and you've lost a lot of blood
       you're having difficulty breathing
       you swallow a large amount of blood that makes you vomit
       the nosebleed developed after a serious injury, such as a car crash
                                      What causes nosebleeds?
The inside of your nose is full of tiny, delicate blood vessels that can become damaged and bleed
relatively easily.

Common causes of nosebleeds include:

       picking your nose
       blowing your nose very hard
       a minor injury to your nose
       changes in humidity or temperature causing the inside of the nose to become dry and
        cracked
                                                lxxii
Occasionally, bleeding can come from the blood vessels deeper within the nose. This can be
caused by a blow to the head, recent nasal surgery and hardened arteries (atherosclerosis).

Read more about the causes of nosebleeds

                                     Who gets nosebleeds?
Nosebleeds are fairly common and most people will experience them every now and again.
Anyone can get a nosebleed, but they most often affect:

   children between two and 10 years of age
   elderly people
   pregnant women
   people who take blood thinning medication such as aspirin or anticoagulants, such as
    warfarin
   people with blood clotting disorders, such as haemophilia
Bleeding may also be heavier or last longer if you take anticoagulants, have a blood clotting
disorder, or have high blood pressure (hypertension).

                                     Are nosebleeds serious?
Nosebleeds aren't usually serious. However, frequent or heavy nosebleeds may indicate more
serious health problems, such as high blood pressure or a blood clotting disorder, and should be
checked.

Excessive bleeding over a prolonged period of time can also lead to further problems such
as anaemia.

If your GP suspects a more serious problem is causing your nosebleeds, they may refer you to an
ear, nose and throat (ENT) specialist for further tests.

                                     Preventing nosebleeds
Things you can do to prevent nosebleeds include:

       avoid picking your nose and keep your fingernails short
       blow your nose as little as possible and only very gently
       keep your home humidified
       wear a head guard during activities in which your nose or head could get injured
       always follow the instructions that come with nasal decongestants – overusing these can
        cause nosebleeds


                                               lxxiii
Talk to your doctor if you experience nosebleeds frequently and aren't able to prevent them.
They may refer you to an ENT specialist for an assessment.

                                     Management of Cuts

These guidelines can help you care for minor cuts and scrapes:

 1. Wash your hands. This helps avoid infection.
 2. Stop the bleeding. Minor cuts and scrapes usually stop bleeding on their own. If needed,
    apply gentle pressure with a clean bandage or cloth and elevate the wound until bleeding
    stops.
 3. Clean the wound. Rinse the wound with water. Keeping the wound under running tap
    water will reduce the risk of infection. Wash around the wound with soap. But don't get
    soap in the wound. And don't use hydrogen peroxide or iodine, which can be irritating.
    Remove any dirt or debris with a tweezers cleaned with alcohol. See a doctor if you can't
    remove all debris.
 4. Apply an antibiotic or petroleum jelly. Apply a thin layer of an antibiotic ointment or
    petroleum jelly to keep the surface moist and help prevent scarring. Certain ingredients in
    some ointments can cause a mild rash in some people. If a rash appears, stop using the
    ointment.
 5. Cover the wound. Apply a bandage, rolled gauze or gauze held in place with paper tape.
    Covering the wound keeps it clean. If the injury is just a minor scrape or scratch, leave it
    uncovered.
 6. Change the dressing. Do this at least once a day or whenever the bandage becomes wet or
    dirty.
 7. Get a tetanus shot. Get a tetanus shot if you haven't had one in the past five years and the
    wound is deep or dirty.
 8. Watch for signs of infection. See a doctor if you see signs of infection on the skin or near
    the wound, such as redness, increasing pain, drainage, warmth or swelling.
                                  Management of Fractures




                                              lxxiv
    Figure 14: Fracture First Aid

https://pbs.twimg.com/media/D7d_b2aW4AA_MKe.jpg

A fracture is a broken bone. It requires medical attention. If the broken bone is the result of
major trauma or injury, call 911 or your local emergency number.

Also call for emergency help if:

  The person is unresponsive, isn't breathing or isn't moving. Begin CPR if there's no breathing
   or heartbeat.
 There is heavy bleeding.
 Even gentle pressure or movement causes pain.
 The limb or joint appears deformed.
 The bone has pierced the skin.
 The extremity of the injured arm or leg, such as a toe or finger, is numb or bluish at the tip.
 You suspect a bone is broken in the neck, head or back.
Don't move the person except if necessary to avoid further injury. Take these actions
immediately while waiting for medical help:

   Stop any bleeding. Apply pressure to the wound with a sterile bandage, a clean cloth or a
    clean piece of clothing.
   Immobilize the injured area. Don't try to realign the bone or push a bone that's sticking out
    back in. If you've been trained in how to splint and professional help isn't readily available,

                                                lxxv
     apply a splint to the area above and below the fracture sites. Padding the splints can help
     reduce discomfort.
    Apply ice packs to limit swelling and help relieve pain. Don't apply ice directly to the skin.
     Wrap the ice in a towel, piece of cloth or some other material.
    Treat for shock. If the person feels faint or is breathing in short, rapid breaths, lay the person
     down with the head slightly lower than the trunk and, if possible, elevate the legs.


                                     Management of Drowning
                                           Call 999 if:
        Someone is drowning

 1. Get Help
 Notify a lifeguard, if one is close. If not, ask someone to call 911.
 If you are alone, follow the steps below.


 2. Move the Person
 Take the person out of the water.


 3. Check for Breathing
 Place your ear next to the person's mouth and nose. Do you feel air on your cheek?
 Look to see if the person's chest is moving.


 4. If the Person is Not Breathing, Check Pulse
 Check the person's pulse for 10 seconds.


  5. If There is No Pulse, Start CPR
Carefully place person on back.

        For an adult or child, place the heel of one hand on the center of the chest at the nipple
         line. You can also push with one hand on top of the other. For an infant, place two fingers
         on the breastbone.
        For an adult or child, press down at least 2 inches. Make sure not to press on ribs. For
         an infant, press down about 1 and 1/2 inches. Make sure not to press on the end of the
         breastbone.
        Do chest compressions only, at the rate of 100-120 per minute or more. Let the chest rise
         completely between pushes.
        Check to see if the person has started breathing.

    6. Repeat if Person Is Still Not Breathing


                                                 lxxvi
   If you've been trained in CPR, you can now open the airway by tilting the head back and
    lifting the chin.
   Pinch the nose of the victim closed. Take a normal breath, cover the victim's mouth with
    yours to create an airtight seal, and then give 2 one-second breaths as you watch for the chest
    to rise.
   Give 2 breaths followed by 30 chest compressions.
   Continue this cycle of 30 compressions and 2 breaths until the person starts breathing or
    emergency help arrives.

                                    Management of Poisoning
Poisoning is injury or death due to swallowing, inhaling, touching or injecting various drugs,
chemicals, venoms or gases. Many substances — such as drugs and carbon monoxide — are
poisonous only in higher concentrations or dosages. And others — such as cleaners — are
dangerous only if ingested. Children are particularly sensitive to even small amounts of certain
drugs and chemicals.

How you treat someone who may have been poisoned depends on:

   The person's symptoms
 The person's age
 Whether you know the type and amount of the substance that caused poisoning
If you are concerned about possible poisoning, call Poison Help at 800-222-1222 in the United
States or your regional poison control center. Poison control centers are excellent resources for
poisoning information and, in many situations, may advise that in-home observation is all that's
needed.

                                     When to suspect poisoning
Poisoning signs and symptoms can mimic other conditions, such as seizure, alcohol intoxication,
stroke and insulin reaction. Signs and symptoms of poisoning may include:

   Burns or redness around the mouth and lips
 Breath that smells like chemicals, such as gasoline or paint thinner
 Vomiting
 Difficulty breathing
 Drowsiness
 Confusion or other altered mental status
If you suspect poisoning, be alert for clues such as empty pill bottles or packages, scattered pills,
and burns, stains and odors on the person or nearby objects. With a child, consider the possibility
that he or she may have applied medicated patches or swallowed a button battery.

  When to call for help
Call 911 or your local emergency number immediately if the person is:

                                                lxxvii
   Drowsy or unconscious
 Having difficulty breathing or has stopped breathing
 Uncontrollably restless or agitated
 Having seizures
 Known to have taken medications, or any other substance, intentionally or accidentally
    overdosed (in these situations the poisoning typically involves larger amounts, often along
    with alcohol).
Call Poison Help at 800-222-1222 in the United States or your regional poison control center in
the following situations:

  The person is stable and has no symptoms
 The person is going to be transported to the local emergency department
Be ready to describe the person's symptoms, age, weight, other medications he or she is taking,
and any information you have about the poison. Try to determine the amount ingested and how
long since the person was exposed to it. If possible, have on hand the pill bottle, medication
package or other suspect container so you can refer to its label when speaking with the poison
control center.

  What to do while waiting for help
Take the following actions until help arrives:

 Swallowed poison. Remove anything remaining in the person's mouth. If the suspected
  poison is a household cleaner or other chemical, read the container's label and follow
  instructions for accidental poisoning.
 Poison on the skin. Remove any contaminated clothing using gloves. Rinse the skin for 15
  to 20 minutes in a shower or with a hose.
 Poison in the eye. Gently flush the eye with cool or lukewarm water for 20 minutes or until
  help arrives.
 Inhaled poison. Get the person into fresh air as soon as possible.
 If the person vomits, turn his or her head to the side to prevent choking.
 Begin CPR if the person shows no signs of life, such as moving, breathing or coughing.
 Call Poison Help at 800-222-1222 in the United States or your regional poison control for
  additional instructions.
 Have somebody gather pill bottles, packages or containers with labels, and any other
  information about the poison to send along with the ambulance team.
 Caution
 Syrup of ipecac. Don't give syrup of ipecac or do anything to induce vomiting. Expert
  groups, including the American Association of Poison Control Centers and the American
  Academy of Pediatrics, no longer endorse using ipecac in children or adults who have taken
  pills or other potentially poisonous substances. No good evidence proves its effectiveness,
  and it often can do more harm than good.

                                                 lxxviii
    If you still have old bottles of syrup of ipecac in your home, throw them away.

   Button batteries. The small, flat batteries used in watches and other electronics —
    particularly the larger, nickel-sized ones — are especially dangerous to small children. A
    battery stuck in the esophagus can cause severe burns in as little as 2 hours.

    If you suspect that a child has swallowed one of these batteries, immediately take him or her
    for an emergency X-ray to determine its location. If the battery is in the esophagus, it will
    have to be removed. If it has passed into the stomach, it's usually safe to allow it to pass on
    through the intestinal tract.

   Medicated patches. If you think a child got hold of medicated patches (adhesive products
    for transdermal drug delivery), carefully inspect the child's skin and remove any that are
    attached. Also check the roof of the mouth, where they can get stuck if the child sucks on
    them.

                                 Management of Snake Bites
Most snakes aren't dangerous to humans. Only about 15% worldwide and 20% in the United
States are venomous. In North America, these include the rattlesnake, coral snake, water
moccasin and copperhead. Their bites can cause severe injuries and sometimes death.

Most venomous snakes have eyes like slits and are known as pit vipers. Their heads are
triangular and they have fangs. One exception is the coral snake, which has a rounded head and
round pupils. Nonvenomous snakes typically have rounded heads, round pupils and no fangs.

If a venomous snake bites you, call 911 or your local emergency number immediately, especially
if the bitten area changes color, begins to swell or is painful. Many emergency rooms stock
antivenom drugs, which may help you.

If possible, take these steps while waiting for medical help:

 Move beyond the snake's striking distance.
 Remain still and calm to help slow the spread of venom.
 Remove jewelry and tight clothing before you start to swell.
 Position yourself, if possible, so that the bite is at or below the level of your heart.
 Clean the wound with soap and water. Cover it with a clean, dry dressing.
 Caution
 Don't use a tourniquet or apply ice.
 Don't cut the wound or attempt to remove the venom.
 Don't drink caffeine or alcohol, which could speed your body's absorption of venom.
 Don't try to capture the snake. Try to remember its color and shape so that you can describe
  it, which will help in your treatment. If you have a smartphone with you and it won't delay
  your getting help, take a picture of the snake from a safe distance to help with identification.
                                                lxxix
  Symptoms
Most snakebites occur on the extremities. Typical symptoms of the bite from a nonvenomous
snake are pain and scratches at the site.

Usually, after a bite from a venomous snake, there is severe burning pain at the site within 15 to
30 minutes. This can progress to swelling and bruising at the wound and all the way up the arm
or leg. Other signs and symptoms include nausea, labored breathing and a general sense of
weakness, as well as an odd taste in the mouth.

Some snakes, such as coral snakes, have toxins that cause neurological symptoms, such as skin
tingling, difficulty speaking and weakness.

Sometimes, a venomous snake can bite without injecting venom. The result of these "dry bites"
is irritation at the site.

To watch a video follow the link below

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zINn6wXwV08

                                       Assisting an Asthma Attack Patient
                                               Diagnosis
For adults and children over 5 years old, lung (pulmonary) function tests are used to check how
well the lungs are working. Poor lung function is a sign that your asthma isn't well controlled. In
some cases, lung function tests are also used in asthma emergencies to help your doctor
understand the severity of an asthma attack or how well treatment is working.
Lung function tests include:
   Peak flow. Your doctor may take a peak flow reading when you come in for a scheduled
      visit or for emergency treatment during an asthma attack. This test measures how quickly
      you can breathe out. You may also use a peak flow meter at home to monitor your lung
      function.
      The results of this test are known as peak expiratory flow (PEF). A peak flow test is done
      by blowing into a mouthpiece as hard and as fast as you can with a single breath
      (expiration).
   Spirometry. During spirometry, you take deep breaths and forcefully exhale into a hose
      connected to a machine called a spirometer. A common spirometry measurement is forced
      expiratory volume, which measures how much air you can breathe out in one second.
      The results of this test are known as forced expiratory volume (FEV). Spirometry can also
      measure how much air your lungs can hold and the rate at which you can inhale and exhale.
   Nitric oxide measurement. This exam measures the amount of nitric oxide gas you have
      in your breath when you exhale. High nitric oxide readings indicate inflammation of the
      bronchial tubes.


                                                lxxx
    Pulse oximetry. This test measures the amount of oxygen in your blood. It's measured
     through your fingernail and only takes seconds.



                                Management of Asthma Attack
If you and your doctor have worked out an asthma plan, follow its directions at the first sign of
an asthma attack.

This generally means taking two to six puffs of a quick-acting (rescue) inhaler to get airway-
expanding medication, such as albuterol (ProAir HFA, Proventil HFA, Ventolin HFA, others)
and levalbuterol (Xopenex), deep into your lungs. Small children and those who have trouble
with inhalers can use a nebulizer. After 20 minutes, you can repeat the treatment one time if
necessary. If you continue to wheeze or feel breathless after treatment, visit your doctor or urgent
care that day.

If you're having symptoms of a severe asthma attack, such as difficulty speaking because you're
so short of breath, use your quick-acting (rescue) medication and get to a doctor's office or
urgent care immediately.

Your doctor may recommend that you continue to use quick-acting medication every three to
four hours for a day or two after the attack. You might also need to take oral corticosteroid
medication for a short time.

   Emergency Management of Asthma Attack
If you go to the emergency room for an asthma attack in progress, you'll need medications to get
your asthma under immediate control. These can include:

    Short-acting beta agonists, such as albuterol. These are the same medications as those in
     your quick-acting (rescue) inhaler. You may need to use a machine called a nebulizer,
     which turns the medication into a mist that can be inhaled deep into your lungs.

    Oral corticosteroids. Taken in pill form, these medications help reduce lung inflammation
     and get your asthma symptoms under control. Corticosteroids can also be given
     intravenously, typically to patients who are vomiting or who are experiencing respiratory
     failure.

    Ipratropium (Atrovent HFA). Ipratropium is sometimes used as a bronchodilator to treat
     a severe asthma attack, especially if albuterol is not fully effective.



                                                lxxxi
    Intubation, mechanical ventilation and oxygen. If your asthma attack is life-threatening,
     your doctor may put a breathing tube down your throat into your upper airway. Using a
     machine that pumps oxygen into your lungs will help you breathe while your doctor gives
     you medications to bring your asthma under control.

After your asthma symptoms improve, your doctor may want you to stay in the emergency room
for a few hours or longer to make sure you don't have another asthma attack. When your doctor
feels your asthma is sufficiently under control, you'll be able to go home. Your doctor will give
you instructions on what to do if you have another attack.

If your asthma symptoms don't improve after emergency treatment, your doctor may admit you
to the hospital and give you medications every hour or every few hours. If you're having severe
asthma symptoms, you may need to breathe oxygen through a mask. In some cases, a severe,
persistent asthma attack requires a stay in the intensive care unit (ICU).

Assisting an Epileptic Patient


Epilepsy is a common condition of the brain in which a person tends to have recurrent
unprovoked seizures.

About 70% of people with epilepsy gain control of their seizures with medication. People who
continue to have seizures are more vulnerable to the potential risks associated with seizures,
especially when seizures occur without warning and impair awareness.

Epilepsy, like other long-term conditions such as asthma or diabetes, comes with certain risks. If
left unchecked these can become very serious.

Seizure-related risks are higher when people have poorly controlled seizures. Good seizure
control is the first step in reducing seizure-related risks.

Seizures can sometimes lead to injuries or falls, and they can occasionally be more serious –
even contributing to, or causing, death. Different types of seizures carry different risks.

Your risk level depends on the type of seizures you have, and your lifestyle. For instance, poorly
controlled tonic-clonic seizures pose the highest safety risk, and if you take part in activities such
as mountain climbing, this risk is increased.

Life is never risk-free, but taking positive action to reduce your seizures, thinking about risks
specific to you and discussing seizure management with your doctor are a start to reducing some
of your seizure-related risks.

                                      Epileptic seizure first aid
                                                lxxxii
     If you are with someone having a tonic-clonic seizure (where the body stiffens, followed by
     general muscle jerking), try to:

    Stay calm and remain with the person.
    If they have food or fluid in their mouth, roll them onto their side immediately.
    Keep them safe and protect them from injury.
    Place something soft under their head and loosen any tight clothing.
    Reassure the person until they recover.
    Time the seizure, if you can.
    Gently roll the person onto their side after the jerking stops.

     Do not put anything into their mouth or restrain or move the person, unless they are in danger.

       If a person having a seizure is in a wheelchair

     If a person has a seizure when they are in a wheelchair, car seat or stroller:

    Leave the person seated with the seatbelt on (unless it is causing injury).
    Put the wheelchair brakes on.
    If it’s a tilt wheelchair, tilt the seat and lock in position.
    Support their head until the seizure has ended.
    Lean the person slightly to one side to aid drainage of any fluid in the mouth.

     After the seizure, if the person is having trouble breathing or they need to sleep, take them out of
     the chair and put them in the recovery position.

     If their breathing difficulties continue, call an ambulance and closely monitor the person. Be
     prepared to perform CPR if they stop breathing.

     Be aware that the CPR technique for adults is different to the CPR technique for young
     children and infants.

       Seizures in water

     If a seizure occurs in water:

1.   Support the person's head so their face is out of the water.
2.   Tilt their head back to ensure a clear airway.


                                                        lxxxiii
3.   If the person is in a pool, remove them from the water when the jerking stops. Note: In the rare
     circumstance the jerking does not stop, seek help from others if possible, and remove the person
     from the water at the shallowest end of the pool.
4.   If the person is in the surf, remove them from the water immediately.
5.   Flotation devices may be useful when removing someone from water.
6.   Seek help if possible.

     Once out of the water:

    Call triple zero (000) for an ambulance immediately. (Do this even if the person is breathing, as
     they may have inhaled water)
    Place the person on their side.
    Check to see if they are breathing.
    If they are not breathing, or they are not breathing normally, reposition the person onto their back
     and begin the appropriate form of CPR: CPR for adults is different to the CPR for young
     children and infants.

       When to call an ambulance for an epileptic seizure

     Call for an ambulance if:

    the seizure lasts for 5 or more minutes or longer than what is normal for the person
    a second seizure quickly follows
    the person is not responding for more than 5 minutes after the seizure ends
    the person has breathing difficulties after the jerking stops
    it is the person’s first known seizure
    the seizure occurs in water
    the person is injured
    you are in doubt.

                                        Assisting a Diabetic Patient

     Diabetes can become serious in the short term if blood sugar levels become either too high or too
     low. The following information details what to do in an emergency.

     This covers low blood sugar (hypoglycemia), very high blood sugar (diabetic ketoacidosis) and
     what to do if you are left without your diabetes medication and/or supplies.

                                                     lxxxiv
                               What counts as a diabetic emergency?

It can be a difficult area sometimes to know what counts as a genuine emergency.

News reports in recent years have highlighted that a significant number of ‘999’ ambulance call-
outs have not been necessary – for example to treat mild hypoglycemia which, in some cases, has
been successfully treated before the ambulance has arrived.


This isn’t to say that conditions, such as hypoglycemia, are not dangerous but that it’s important
to know when a situation really is an emergency so that an ambulance is not unnecessarily
called.

                              When should I call an ambulance?
An ambulance will be needed if someone has either very high or very low blood sugar levels that
presents an immediate danger and neither they nor anyone around is confidently able to treat
them.

Ketoacidosis and Hyperosmolar Hyperglycemic Nonketotic Syndrome are both life threatening
conditions. Hypoglycemia can also be life threatening in some cases.

Someone with diabetes that is unconscious is one of the situations in which you should call for
an ambulance.

                                      Severe hypoglycemia
 Hypoglycemia can become dangerous if it is not treated quickly, particularly if it is a result of
 an insulin overdose.
 Severe hypoglycemia is generally recognised as hypoglycemia involving:
 Convulsions (fitting)
 Unconsciousness

Hypoglycemia can often be treated at home but if someone is unable to take sugar or does not
show signs of improvement after taking sugar, other options will be needed such as a glucagon
injection or an ambulance.

If you have glucagon, check it is in date, and follow the instructions in the glucagon kit carefully.
If you are unsure about using the kit, and nobody is present who is, call for an ambulance.

                               Treating non-severe hypoglycaemia



                                                lxxxv
  To prevent hypoglycemia developing into a more serious situation, make sure you have hypo
   treatments, such as the HypoWallet, to hand.
                                      Preventing emergencies
In most cases, non-severe hypoglycemia can be treated by taking glucose followed by slower
acting carbohydrate such as bread or fruit.
To prevent hypoglycemia developing into a more serious situation, make sure you have hypo
treatments available at all times. Having a HypoWallet is a useful way to ensure you’re well
prepared for hypos.
                                    Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA)
Diabetic ketoacidosis is a serious condition which develops if blood glucose levels become very
high.
The symptoms include vomiting and a laboured form of breathing known as kussmaul breathing,
which may be identified by gasping breaths. If someone is going through DKA, it is often
possible to detect ketones on the breath, which can be similar to a fruity smell or similar to nail
polish.

If diabetic ketoacidosis is suspected and the person is either incoherent or unable to help him or
herself, call 999.

                 Hyperosmolar Hyperglycemic Nonketotic Syndrome (HHNS)
HHNS is a short term complication that can occur in people with non-insulin dependent diabetes,
such as type 2 diabetes, if blood glucose levels rise to a very high level of 30 mmol/l or above.

If someone is showing the signs of HHNS it is important they receive emergency treatment.

                                 Whilst the ambulance is coming

If the person is unconscious or unable to sit or stand, put them into the recovery position. Try to
stay with the person in case their situation should get worse.

                                      Diabetes emergency ID

If an emergency situation is developing, it’s important the people around you know that you have
diabetes to help them to be able to help you.

Wearing emergency identification will help people, including paramedics, to recognise that you
have diabetes should you need emergency care.

   Alert             ID               diabetes              emergency                 identification



                                                  lxxxvi
                          Running out of diabetes medication or supplies

You should ensure you have sufficient supplies, including spares, wherever possible but there
can be times when you may need emergency medication or supplies.If you need medication and
supplies right away you will need to get an emergency prescription.

                            Effective communication on casualty’s condition
Thinking about how best to communicate with casualties requires an understanding of how
people behave in emergencies, what they need to hear, and how they want to hear it. Answers to
these questions can come from those who have experienced being casualties, but this comes with
significant challenges. A useful alternative is to collect feedback from people who have played
casualties in live exercises.
Two key positive factors in Casualty Communication
     Reassurance – the ability to reassure and calm the individual down
     Authoritative directness – the ability to give simple, clear and directive instructions

To assist frontline responders in remembering key methods to communicate we recommend
bearing in mind the following ‘FEAR’ mnemonic:

F – communicate clear facts about what has happened, when responders can get to casualties,
what is going on, etc. And if you aren’t clear make it clear you aren’t clear!

E – establish a line of communication as early as humanly possible.

A – where possible keep casualties active in their own recovery and mobilisation. Research
indicates a major factor in saving lives is the active participation of others in the incident in
providing assistance.

R – updates and communication must be regular. Even if there is nothing to update on, just
ensuring that casualties are told ‘nothing has changed but we are still doing X Y and Z’ creates
an ongoing and important dialogue. Don’t leave casualties for unspecified amounts of time and
always indicate roughly when you will update them.

                            Handing over casualty to medical personnel
Once you have connected with the emergency service’s operator and requested an ambulance, hold
the line to tell them details such as:

      Location of casualty—providing the exact address is best, but if you aren’t sure of this,
       give some landmarks or nearest cross streets, and some directions
      Number of casualties
                                                lxxxvii
     Nature and extent of illness or accident—include the physical condition of the casualty,
      and any relevant signs and symptoms (see below for more details)
    The number of the phone you are using
    Your name.
Then hold the line to answer any further questions and provide any other relevant details, such as
damaged power lines.

                                       The casualty’s condition
When providing details of the casualty’s condition, include the following
   Colour—What colour is the casualty’s skin?
   Conscious state—Is the casualty conscious?
   Breathing—Is the casualty breathing? If not, have rescue breaths and CPR commenced?
   Bleeding—Is the bleeding controlled? Is it bright red spurting blood or dark red flowing
      blood?
   Pupils—Are the pupils of equal size and reacting to light?
   Shock—Are there signs of shock (pale, sweaty, nauseous, cold)?
   Movement—Does the casualty have coordinated movement?
   Can the casualty feel and move limbs, if conscious?
   Anything abnormal (such as bruising, a bone sticking out or swelling).

                           Handing over to Emergency Services personnel
On the arrival of the ambulance:

 Continue first aid management and observation of the casualty until the ambulance officer is
  ready to assume care
   provide as much information as possible, this may include:
   the nature of the accident to the time you arrived on the scene
   the types of first aid management provided
   the duration of any Basic Life Support
 Provide any other information that is asked for, including your contact details
 Stay and assist the ambulance officer if requested to do so.

                              Monitoring Casualty’s condition
  It is important that the whole process of responding to the casualty occurs quickly so that
  assessment and management of the situation may be carried out effectively.

  How do you know that somebody is in need of first aid in the first place? What are the signs that
  make you suddenly stop what you are doing and become more alert to an incident or situation?
  Your answer may include using your senses:
                                              lxxxviii
What do you hear? Perhaps you heard shouting, screaming, a call for help, a crash, or moaning.

What do you see? Did you see a person on the ground, strange behaviour, an upturned chair, a
group of people, smoke or flames?

What do you smell? Did you smell gas, petrol, fumes or burning?

The following are some guidelines for responding to the casualty’s condition:
      Do not approach the casualty if it is unsafe to do so.
      ALWAYS call for help.
      If the casualty is unconscious, determine airway and breathing
      If the person is conscious but can’t move or feel their arms or legs, DON’T move them.
        They may have a spinal injury.
      Manage illness and injuries with the guidance of a qualified first aider and stay with the
        casualty.
If you need to phone for an ambulance and give details of the situation and workplace location,
make sure you know exactly where you are! You should know the following:
      Address
      Nearest cross street
      The building level you are on
      The best way for the ambulance to gain access to the casualty
                                         Effective first aid principles
       What actually is first aid? First aid is the initial care of the sick or injured. First aid
       management is a set of established procedures and aims to:
           Help promote recovery
           Prevent the injury or sickness from becoming worse
           Seek medical help
           Promote a safe environment
           Provide comfort
           Protect the unconscious casualty
           Preserve life.
It is important to follow these basic first aid steps:
           Do not panic
           Assess the situation quickly
           Make sure the area is safe to approach
           Identify the injury or sickness
           Call for help
           Stay with the casualty
           Manage the casualty
                                             lxxxix
 Monitor the casualty; their situation could change at any time




                                   xc
4.2.1.4 Learning Activities

  4.2.1.4.1 Practical Activities
1. You are in the skills laboratory and your instructor provides you with a mannequin.
    Demonstrate how to provide first aid to an epileptic patient using the mannequin?
4.2.1.4.2 Self-Assessment
You are provided with the following questions for self -assessment, attempt them and check your
responses
1. You have encountered an unconscious patient who needs cardio-pulmonary resuscitation.
    What are the steps of cardio-pulmonary resuscitation?
2. You are the only medic around in your village. Your neighbor calls you to help an adult who
    has experienced severe choking. What is the procedure of performing back blows and
    abdominal thrusts?
3. What is the management of burns and scalds?
4. You are the first to reach to the scene of a patient involved in trauma. Primary survey in the
    management of trauma involves?

5. One of your classmates begins nose bleeding. Demonstrate how you will help him to stop the
   nose bleeding?
6. Cuts and scrapes are very common in day to day life. How can you help a patient with a
   minor cut or scrapes?
7. One of your friends drowns in a swimming escapade. As a health worker, how can you help a
   drowning patient?
8. You are in the emergency room where you have a patient with asthma attack. What is the
   emergency management of asthma attack?

4.2.1.5 Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials
   Casualty department
   Functional skills laboratory
   First aid kit
   Emergency room
   Emergency room standard manuals
   Emergency trolley
   First Aid Manual.
   Tweezers
   Alcohol Swabs
     Antibiotic Ointment
     Bandages

                                               xci
   Gauze Pads
   Medical Tape
   Elastic Bandages
   Pain relievers
   Instant cold pack
   Waste disposal bins
   Personal protective equipment
   Health workers
   Presentation charts
   Flip charts




                                    xcii
4.2.1.6 References

Jevon, P. & Ewens, B. (2012) Monitoring the Critically Ill Patient, 3rd Edition, Wiley-Blackwell,
Oxford

Peitzman A.B., et al. (2012) The Trauma Manual, 2nd edition. Philadelphia, Pa., Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.

Rapid Response to Everyday Emergencies (2016) A Nurse's Guide. Philadelphia, Pa., Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.

Royal College of Nursing (2017) Record Keeping: The Facts, RCN, viewed 28 May
2018, https://www.rcn.org.uk/professional-development/publications/pub-006051




                                              xciii
2.2.1.7 MODEL ANSWERS

Self-Assessment
1. You have encountered an unconscious patient who needs cardio-pulmonary
    resuscitation. What are the steps of cardio-pulmonary resuscitation?
     Step 1 Call 999 or the nearest ambulance services
     Step 2 Place the person on their back and open their airway

     Step 3 Check for breathing-Place your ear next the person’s mouth and listen for no more
      than 10 seconds. If you do not hear breathing, or you only hear occasional gasps, begin
      CPR.
    Step 4 Perform 30 chest compressions-Place one of your hands on top of the other and
      clasp them together. With the heel of the hands and straight elbows, push hard and fast in
      the center of the chest, slightly below the nipples.
    Push at least 2 inches deep. Compress their chest at a rate of least 100 times per minute.
      Let the chest rise fully between compressions.
    Step 5 Perform two rescue breaths-Making sure their mouth is clear, tilt their head back
      slightly and lift their chin. Pinch their nose shut, place your mouth fully over theirs, and
      blow to make their chest rise.
    Step 6 Repeat-Repeat the cycle of 30 chest compressions and two rescue breaths until the
      person starts breathing or help arrives.
2. You are the only medic around in your village. Your neighbor calls you to help an adult
   who has experienced severe choking. What is the procedure of performing back blows
   and abdominal thrusts?
   Back blows Procedure
    Stand behind them and slightly to one side. Support their chest with 1 hand. Lean them
      forward so the object blocking their airway will come out of their mouth, rather than
      moving further down.
      Give up to 5 sharp blows between their shoulder blades with the heel of your hand. The
       heel is between the palm of your hand and your wrist.
      Check if the blockage has cleared.
    If not, give up to 5 abdominal thrusts.
  Abdominal Thrust Procedure
    Stand behind the person who's choking.
    Place your arms around their waist and bend them forward.
    Clench 1 fist and place it right above their belly button.

      Put the other hand on top of your fist and pull sharply inwards and upwards.
      Repeat this movement up to 5 times.
                                               xciv
3. What is the management of burns and scalds?
 immediately get the person away from the heat source to stop the burning

   cool the burn with cool or lukewarm running water for 20 minutes – don't use ice, iced water,
    or any creams or greasy substances such as butter
   remove any clothing or jewellery that's near the burnt area of skin, including babies' nappies
    - but don't move anything that's stuck to the skin
   make sure the person keeps warm – by using a blanket, for example, but take care not to rub
    it against the burnt area
   cover the burn by placing a layer of cling film over it – a clean plastic bag could also be used
    for burns on your hand
   use painkillers such as paracetamol or ibuprofen to treat any pain
  if the face or eyes are burnt, sit up as much as possible, rather than lying down - this helps to
   reduce swelling
4. You are the first to reach to the scene of a patient involved in trauma. Primary survey
   in the management of trauma involves?

       Airway-- open the patient's airway using a jaw-thrust maneuver with manual, in-line
        stabilization of the neck. If you find food, blood, vomitus, or other debris, suction the
        airway quickly to prevent aspiration. To better remove secretions, you may need to
        carefully logroll the patient to his side. Manually stabilize his neck and spine as you do
        so.

     Breathing-- Note respiratory rate and depth, chest expansion, and accessory muscle use
      and auscultate breath sounds bilaterally. Also palpate for crepitus or subcutaneous air in
      the neck and chest, which can indicate a pneumothorax or airway injury.
    Circulation--Once you've assessed and supported your patient's breathing, attend to his
      circulatory status. Assess for the presence and quality of peripheral pulses to quickly
      estimate blood prssure
    Disability--To evaluate disability, you'll evaluate the patient's LOC, pupil response, and
      gross sensorimotor function. To document his baseline LOC, quickly assess and record
      an initial GCS score.
    Exposure--The final component of the primary survey is exposure. Remove the patient's
      clothing completely so you can inspect his entire body for injuries. Use good judgment
      when removing clothing; trying to remove a shirt by pulling or manipulating it may
      worsen the injury or pain. Cutting clothing away with trauma shears is usually best.
5. One of your classmates begins nose bleeding. Demonstrate how you will help him to
   stop the nose bleeding?


                                                 xcv
      sit down and firmly pinch the soft part of your nose, just above your nostrils, for at least
       10-15 minutes
      lean forward and breathe through your mouth – this will drain blood into your nose
       instead of down the back of your throat
      place an ice pack or bag of frozen vegetables covered by a towel on the bridge of your
       nose
     stay upright, rather than lying down, as this reduces the blood pressure in the blood
      vessels of your nose and will discourage further bleeding
    If the bleeding eventually stops, you won't usually need to seek medical advice.
      However, in some cases you may need further treatment from your doctor or in hospital
6. Cuts and scrapes are very common in day to day life. How can you help a patient with a
   minor cut or scrapes?
    Wash your hands. This helps avoid infection.
      Stop the bleeding. Minor cuts and scrapes usually stop bleeding on their own. If needed,
       apply gentle pressure with a clean bandage or cloth and elevate the wound until bleeding
       stops.
      Clean the wound. Rinse the wound with water. Keeping the wound under running tap
       water will reduce the risk of infection. Wash around the wound with soap. But don't get
       soap in the wound. And don't use hydrogen peroxide or iodine, which can be irritating.
       Remove any dirt or debris with a tweezers cleaned with alcohol. See a doctor if you can't
       remove all debris.
      Apply an antibiotic or petroleum jelly. Apply a thin layer of an antibiotic ointment or
       petroleum jelly to keep the surface moist and help prevent scarring. Certain ingredients in
       some ointments can cause a mild rash in some people. If a rash appears, stop using the
       ointment.
      Cover the wound. Apply a bandage, rolled gauze or gauze held in place with paper tape.
       Covering the wound keeps it clean. If the injury is just a minor scrape or scratch, leave it
       uncovered.
      Change the dressing. Do this at least once a day or whenever the bandage becomes wet or
       dirty.
      Get a tetanus shot. Get a tetanus shot if you haven't had one in the past five years and the
       wound is deep or dirty.
      Watch for signs of infection. See a doctor if you see signs of infection on the skin or near
       the wound, such as redness, increasing pain, drainage, warmth or swelling.
7. One of your friends drowns in a swimming escapade. As a health worker, how can you
   help a drowning patient?

                                                xcvi
         Get Help--Notify a lifeguard, if one is close. If not, ask someone to call 999.
         Move the Person--Take the person out of the water.
         Check for Breathing--Place your ear next to the person's mouth and nose. Do you feel
          air on your cheek?
      If the Person is Not Breathing, Check Pulse--Check the person's pulse for 10 seconds.
      If There is No Pulse, Start cardio-pulmonary resuscitation
      Repeat cardio-pulmonary resuscitation if Person Is Still Not Breathing
8. You are in the emergency room where you have a patient with asthma attack. What is
   the emergency management of asthma attack?
    Short-acting beta agonists, such as albuterol--These are the same medications as those in
       your quick-acting (rescue) inhaler. You may need to use a machine called a nebulizer,
       which turns the medication into a mist that can be inhaled deep into your lungs.
    Oral corticosteroids. Taken in pill form, these medications help reduce lung inflammation
       and get your asthma symptoms under contr ol. Corticosteroids can also be given
       intravenously, typically to patients who are vomiting or who are experiencing respiratory
       failure.
    Ipratropium (Atrovent HFA). Ipratropium is sometimes used as a bronchodilator to treat a
       severe asthma attack, especially if albuterol is not fully effective.
    Intubation, mechanical ventilation and oxygen. If your asthma attack is life-threatening,
       your doctor may put a breathing tube down your throat into your upper airway. Using a
       machine that pumps oxygen into your lungs will help you breathe while your doctor gives
       you medications to bring your asthma under control.




                                              xcvii
4.2.1 Learning Outcome 3:
Evaluate first aid intervention

 4.2.1.1 Introduction to the learning outcome

 This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to evaluate first aid
 intervention. It includes evaluating response of the casualty to the intervention and evaluating
 first aider’s response to the situation. Effective evaluation of the casualty helps in proper
 response of the emergency situation.

 4.2.1.2 Performance Standard

7.   Evaluated the response of the casualty to the intervention based on the initial assessment
8.   Evaluated the response of the first aider to the situation based on principles and procedures of
     first aid

 4.2.1.3 Information Sheet

 Definition of Terms
 Casualty- the department of a hospital providing immediate treatment for emergency cases
 First Aid- is the first and immediate assistance given to any person suffering from either a minor
 or serious illness or injury, with care provided to preserve life, prevent the condition from
 worsening, or to promote recovery
 Emergency services- are the public organizations whose job is to take quick action to deal with
 emergencies when they occur, especially the fire brigade, the police, and the ambulance service.
 Injury- also known as physical trauma is damage to the body caused by external force. This may
 be caused by accidents, falls, hits, weapons, and other causes.

                       Evaluating response of the casualty to the intervention




                                                xcviii
  Figure 15: Apply First Aid, Assess Casualty

https://sielearning.tafensw.edu.au/MCS/FirstAid_Ultimo/firstaid/lo/5251/graphics/2006_157_f01
.gif

An emergency plan is a set of arrangements for responding to, and recovering from emergencies,
and it is about protecting life, property and the environment. The development of an emergency
plan should take into account existing plans at other administrative levels, plans that operate at
the same level, as well as any plans developed for specific hazards.
The prerequisites for planning are: a recognition that risks and vulnerability exist, and that
emergencies can occur; an awareness by the community, government, and decision-makers of
the need to plan and of the benefits of planning; implementation of the plan is guaranteed by
appropriate legislation; and, designation of an organization responsible for coordinating both
planning and emergency response and recovery in the event of an emergency.
The planning process can be applied to any community, organization or activity.
It includes:
      Project definition: determines the aim, objectives and scope of an emergency plan, and
         decides the tasks and the resources required to performing these tasks.
      Formation of a representative planning group: to gather the required information and to
         gain the commitment of key people and organizations, both of which will contribute to
         the successful implementation of the plan.



                                               xcix
      Potential problem analysis: through breaking the problem into its components to
       examine risks, their causes, possible preventive strategies, response and recovery
       strategies, and trigger events for these strategies.
      Resource analysis: to identify the required resources for the response and recovery
       strategies, resources available, discrepancy between requirement and availability, and
       responsibility.
      Designation of roles and responsibilities to individuals and organizations.
      Management structure concerning the command of individual organizations and control
       across organizations.
      Developing strategies and systems for specific response and recovery.
      Documentation: The written emergency plan will consist of the outputs of each step of
       the process.

                                        A four-pillar strategy
The WHO’s Health Action in Crises (HAC) has recently elaborated a five-year strategy to build
the capacity of the health sector and communities in emergency preparedness and risk reduction.
This Strategy consists of four pillars:
    • Assessing and monitoring baseline information on the status of health emergency
         preparedness and risk management at regional and country levels
    • Institutionalizing emergency preparedness and risk management in ministries of health
         and establishing an effective all-hazard/ whole-health programme for this purpose
    • Encouraging and supporting community-based emergency preparedness and risk
         management
    • Improving knowledge and skills in health emergency preparedness and response, and risk
         management.
This strategy aims to substantially increase the preparedness of the communities and the health
sectorto manage health consequences of mass casualty incidents and other emergencies and
crises, and provides the conceptual underpinning to these Guidelines.

                                            Guiding Principle
A number of guiding principles should be observed within all plans, protocols and operational
procedures. These principles are designed to assist planners, policymakers, and implementing
agencies as they develop plans for their own specific situations.
Clear lines of responsibility
Plans must clearly define the roles, responsibilities and expected activities of all those dealing with
the incident. They must allow response to be scaled up from local, to provincial/state and to
national levels in a seamless manner, with no confusion as to who is in charge at each phase of the
response.
All-hazard applicability

                                                  c
While risk assessment will identify those hazards most likely to result in a mass casualty incident
in a given community, that community must prepare its response in such a way that the
arrangements will be effective no matter what the event, be it a hurricane, an airplane crash, or a
pandemic.
Scalability
Preparedness must address different scales of incident and surge in demand for health care.
While some activities (triage, transportation, treatment) are common to managing all mass
casualty incidents, additional measures such as evacuation of large populations may be
necessary. For example, the scale of the 2004 Asian tsunami was beyond the thinking of
planners. Plans must allow for “scale-up” in such events.
Whole-of-health
In addition to death and injury, other health considerations must be planned for. Planning
strategies must also take into account the basics of environmental health (i.e., water, sanitation,
housing); chronic diseases (including mental health); maternal and child health; communicable
diseases; nutrition; and health care delivery services (including health infrastructure).
Knowledge-based
Almost every imaginable form of mass casualty incident has already occurred before, and
planners therefore have access to a great – and growing – body of knowledge. Useful sources of
information may include: official reports from other countries (particularly those with similar
conditions); scientific and epidemiological data; and documentation from WHO and other
organizations
Multisectoral
The success or failure of responses to mass casualty incidents depends on the cooperation of
many sectors – communications, transportation, law and order, security, water and sanitation,
social services, and other non-health sectors – that may not coordinate their “normal” daily
activities. Coordination should be institutionalized not only at the level of national ministries, but
– ultimately most important – at the local level of communities.
National policies which enable local solutions
The fundamental concerns of a mass casualty management system are public safety and the
building of safer communities (“building” in this case means not only physical construction but
strengthening all of the elements – human, organizational and infrastructural – that make up a
community). While plans must be in place to mobilize provincial/state and national resources if
required, the national policy and strategy emphasis must be clearly directed at enabling local
authorities to prepare for, respond to and recover from a mass casualty incident.

No matter what forms that government and public administration take, national emergency
management systems should include:
• Identification of lines of authority, from the national to the local level
• Financial arrangements for funding emergency work


                                                  ci
•   Arrangements to ensure that government and community activities are maintained (for
    example, creation of parallel or “hardened” communications systems to take over if normal
    voice or data transfer systems are affected)
•   National stockpiling of appropriate resources (including provincial or state and local
    prepositioning of stockpiles)
•   Database of national experts for advice on specific problems
•   Protocols and formal arrangements for coordinated efforts with other countries, or between
    provincial/state governments within the country.

                             The Ministry of Health: a leading partner
Whatever the formal institutional arrangements, the Ministry of Health must be heavily involved
in all national emergency management potentially dealing with mass casualties, because of both
its expertise and its normative role in the setting of health-related standards and rules and
procedures. For instance even if the Ministry of Health does not operate ambulances – in some
countries this may be the task of the Red Cross/Red Crescent, Civil Defense authorities, or even
the private sector – the Ministry of Health is nevertheless likely to set the standards regarding
how ambulances are to be equipped, the training of crews, the numbers of ambulances per
thousand population, etc. Because of its expertise, the Ministry of Health is usually well placed
to help health care facilities and main health disciplines to develop their emergency plans, create
training programme, prepare drills and programme, prepare drills and, prepare drills and
exercises, and so on. Finally, the Ministry is usually responsible for promoting standards and
overseeing accreditation, for example in validating the plans developed by health care facilities
and their local partners.
A dedicated unit within the Ministry of Health
In order for the Ministry of Health to meet its potential as a partner, it must organize itself in a
way which maximizes its comparative advantages and brings together the people best suited to
the task at hand. A necessary first step will be to form permanent structures with institutional
responsibility for all Ministry of Health activities related to planning for mass casualty events. A
recommended configuration is a dedicated emergency committee of senior staff, chaired by the
Minister of Health, and a dedicated emergency preparedness and response unit whose head
serves as secretary of the Committee. The Committee and the Unit should adopt a
multidisciplinary, all-hazard, whole-of-health approach, and therefore will consist of experts in
all relevant fields.
Formal and informal relationships with other partners
In most countries, when a mass casualty incident occurs that requires a national response, some
form of national emergency plan exists which is invoked according to established procedures.
Within such arrangements, the immediate role of the Ministry of Health will be to act as a focal
point for liaison, coordination and communication between the various health system
components (e.g., public, private, military, and NGOs) as well as with other ministries, the office
of the head of state and, when necessary, international agencies. This should be done based on a
                                                 cii
health sector plan (see following chapter) that takes into consideration the need for
interdisciplinary coordination with health partners. Because of the potential for confusion arising
over issues such as legal authority, jurisdiction, customs’ importation procedures, and so on, the
Ministry should sign Memoranda of Understanding (or equivalent agreements) with other
partners to formalize the necessary arrangements. These agreements should be written with
relevant national legislations in mind (see: A solid legislative basis, below).
Equally important, Ministry of Health staff should establish working relationships with staff in
other organizations so that, during a crisis, the “players” (key individuals) are known to each
other. This can be most effectively done by joint planning and exercises at all levels (discussed
below), as well as regular meetings and periodic evaluations or reviews.
International cooperation
Although another part of government such as the Ministry of Foreign Affairs may have formal
responsibility for requesting or accepting assistance from outside the country, the Ministry of
Health will have an essential role of facilitating, and coordinating international health assistance
if it is required. This applies when assistance is offered or received, and will normally be
coordinated with other ministries, the national Emergency Management Agency, and the office
of the head of state. Once again, Memoranda of Understanding or other agreements for mutual
aid, support and cooperation should be signed, particularly with neighboring countries,
international agencies (including WHO) and international NGOs. It cannot be over-emphasized
how important it is for these arrangements to have been prepared at a detailed level, in order for
responses to work efficiently.
A solid legislative basis
The Ministry of Health should ensure (in concert with other ministries) that legislations exist
which provides adequate authority for mass casualty management within the overall emergency
preparedness and response plan. This goes well beyond providing special emergency powers
when circumstances require, although that is of course an essential component. Responses from
all levels of government (local, provincial/state, and national) must be defined and enabled in the
appropriate laws, which will typically have titles like Emergency Management Act, Health Act,
Community Services Act, and Quarantine Act.
At a minimum, legislations should define the roles of Ministers and other senior officials (e.g.,
Chief Health Officer, Health/Medical Emergency Coordinator) and provide legal authority for
national emergency councils, committees and advisory groups. It must enable the essential
Command, Control and Coordination models which form the basis for all emergency
management systems. If existing legislations or legislative gaps (i.e., lack of legally defined
authority) act as barriers to effective mass casualty management, the Ministry of Health should
help to draft the necessary amendments, according to the established law-making arrangements
in the country.

                                        Establishing the Baseline


                                                ciii
Improving existing systems first requires establishing a “baseline” – an assessment of current
system’s capacity, against which planned changes can eventually be measured. To do so, the
Ministry of Health should perform a comprehensive analysis of relevant health care resources
available in the country, or direct lower levels of government, such as provinces/states, to do so
if that is where operational responsibility for health is located. This analysis may entail a
comprehensive review of the health care system, or be a more tightly focused look at those
components that will be particularly called on in the event of a mass casualty incident. Whatever
the focus, the baseline analysis should assess and map both the quantity and quality of available
health care facilities, personnel and equipment.
Based on this analysis, a detailed risk assessment (see below), and consultation about the
standards that risk assessment (see below), and consultation about the standards that must be met
in emergency responses, a “gap analysis” can be carried out to (a) decide how to improve, a “gap
analysis” can be carried out to (a) decide how to improve these resources to the required
standards and (b) calculate the additional resources required to respond to a mass casualty
incident should one occur. It will provide the Ministry of Health with the information it needs to
set priorities and coordinate the redistribution of resources for optimum preparedness.
A variety of tools are available to assist with this process, and for assessing specific areas of
health care.
For example, an analysis of the gap between existing trauma care resources and the desired
standard can be performed using the WHO Guidelines for Essential Trauma Care and Pre-
hospital Trauma Care
Systems (see Sources of Information). These publications set affordable minimum standards for
trauma care capabilities, including human resources, physical resources and administrative
mechanisms.
                               Hazard analysis and risk assessment




                                               civ
  Table 2: Hazard Analysis and Risk Assessment Template


https://i.pinimg.com/originals/fd/6a/78/fd6a78e9fb92272065658899aad006c6.jpg

A second key initiative should be to provide a detailed understanding of the hazards and risks
specific to the country. The WHO’s Community emergency preparedness: a manual for
managers and policy-makers provides a detailed discussion of this process. While it may be
carried out or directed by the Ministry of Health at national level, hazard analysis and risk
assessment should also be carried out on a provincial/state basis, particularly if health expertise
and resources are concentrated at those levels. Emphasis should be placed on gathering
retrospective data on previous incidents.
This should not be limited to large-scale disasters but to those of smaller scale such as major
traffic or industrial accidents, mudslides or floods that did not require national intervention, fires
and building collapses, and so on. It should also include a forward-looking component assessing
risk in the future from elements such as unsafe urban development, or changes in weather
patterns.
Coupled with the baseline assessment, the information provided by this hazard analysis and risk
assessment will provide a solid basis for the subsequent process of planning, and for the
allocation of resources. Having in hand the information collected in the baseline analysis, and in
the hazard analysis and risk assessment, the Ministry of Health will be ready to help improve
national preparedness for mass casualty incidents by implementing or sponsoring (i.e., helping
other partners to implement) a number of initiatives. Some of these will be internal to the
Ministry, while others will be carried out in cooperation with partner Ministries or agencies.
                                                  cv
                            Monitoring, Surveillance and Early Warning
Ongoing collection and analysis of information is a vital part of preparedness. At the planning
stage, the Ministry of Health should assess what types of information will be needed to support
the smooth functioning of the National Mass Casualty Management Plan. Particular attention
should be paid to the functions of monitoring, surveillance and early warning.
Monitoring system capacity
Unless some other part of government already has this responsibility, a unit within the Ministry
(likely the one which carried out the baseline analysis) should be designated with responsibility
to gather and maintain such information on an ongoing basis. This must include the most recent
data on system capacity and resources, as well as documentation of lessons observed from
previous incidents. As well as collecting such information, the unit should take responsibility for
processing and disseminating such information in ways that are useful to policy makers and
decision makers – both as part of preparation and in the event of a mass casualty incident.
The unit should make efforts to use information technology to best advantage. For example,
Geospatial Information Systems (GIS) are increasingly affordable, and can be flexible and cost-
effective means of both collecting and providing data vital to tasks such as establishment of
temporary camps, quantifying deaths, and managing logistics. Similarly, web-based solutions
(i.e., use of the internet) may be useful for involving and keeping stakeholders informed through
dedicated websites, online courses and electronic discussion groups.
Surveillance, epidemiology and data collection
As noted earlier, mass casualty incident management does not solely involve trauma cases,
although injuries do constitute an important part of the caseload in many incidents. With the
increasing risk of pandemics and biological and chemical incidents, the Ministry of Health
should ensure that a surveillance system is in place, which will undertake tasks such as pattern
recognition in order to identify risks early and initiate protective measures as needed.
However, it is important that surveillance systems routinely collect data on injuries since, as
mentioned previously, most morbidity and mortality in mass casualty incidents may in fact come
from the cumulative effects of smaller-scale events.
The operational requirements for the surveillance system should be informed by the hazard
analysis and risk assessment exercise carried out earlier, which will have studied the
epidemiology of the most prevalent types of incidents in the country. The Ministry of Health
should continuously update this system to take into account new and emerging threats.
As well as supporting preparedness, such a system will assist the efficient allocation and
application of resources as an incident develops.
Early warning systems
As should be specified within the National Mass Casualty Management Plan (in coordination
with national emergency management systems), that the surveillance function should include the
provision of early warnings when potential incidents – including natural events such as floods
and volcanic eruption – or other worrying trends are identified. This will require the creation of
protocols for triggering warnings and the chain of command that needs to be informed.
                                                cvi
National early warning systems should have agreements and working arrangements with their
counterparts in neighboring countries, with regional structures (i.e., those grouping countries in
cooperative arrangements), and with international organizations like WHO. This will permit
efficient cooperation between countries should the scale or location of a given mass casualty
incident warrant it.
As much as possible, this cooperation should have a practical orientation, with an emphasis on
activities such as joint drills and exercises, regional training and technical networks. WHO
Regional offices can facilitate such activities, offer training in relevant subjects, and obtain
examples of plans or protocols being used in the region or internationally.
Financial and material resources
As well as creating a National Mass Casualty Management Plan, the Ministry of Health must
ensure that it has done a detailed costing of the Plan, as well as estimating costs of responding to
the most probable mass casualty incidents. This will include the resources used at local and
provincial/state levels, as well as those for which the national level retains operational
responsibility.
If the Ministry’s current budget does not cover the necessary costs needed to conduct and
support the activities specified in the Plan, the Ministry should consider making a request for a
special budgetary allocation from the national government. The baseline analysis will be a source
of solid evidence which can be used to justify the request. Other sources such as international
donors should also be considered.
Stockpiling
Depending on the size and topography of the country, the Ministry of Health should consider
prepositioning resources (facilities, staff, supplies and equipment) close to risk areas. This will
speed up the delivery of tiered assistance, and avoid over-reliance upon a few centralized
facilities and on transportation infrastructure that may themselves be damaged in the event of a
natural or man-made major emergency.
The mobilization, transport and deployment of these stockpiled resources must be carefully
planned.
Protection of the resources against natural and man-made hazards must be carefully considered
in such plans, as well as the safety and security of staff and facilities.
Continuous monitoring of expiration of supplies and equipment is important in order to maintain
quality and to permit updating and planning for future replenishment of these vital resources.

                       Evaluating first aider’s response to the situation




                                                cvii
  Figure 16: First Aid: What is a First Aider?


http://2.bp.blogspot.com/sUtTekxc550/T9ySbkShbzI/AAAAAAAAAAM/nJTvZ_Uv_bg/s280/1.
gif



First aid is the help given to someone who is injured or ill to keep them safe and to cause no
further harm. The role of a first aider is to give someone this help. Learn what to do.
1. Assess the situation quickly and calmly.
     Safety: check whether you or the casualty is in any danger. Is it safe to approach them?
        (Are you wearing protective equipment?)
     Scene: find out what caused the accident or situation and how many casualties there are.
     Situation: find out what’s happened, how many people are involved and how old they
        are. Are there any children or elderly?
2. Protect yourself and them from any danger.
     Always protect yourself first – never put yourself at risk.
     Only move them if leaving them would cause them more harm.
     If you can’t make an area safe, call 999 or 112 for emergency help.
3. Prevent infection between you and them.
    1. Wash your hands with soap and water or rub your hands with alcohol gel.
    2. Wear disposable, latex free gloves. Do not touch an open wound without gloves on. If
        you do not have any gloves, you could use clean plastic bags or ask the casualty to dress
        the wound if they are able.
    3. Do not breathe, cough or sneeze over a wound or casualty.
4. Comfort and reassure.
                                               cviii
    Stay calm and take charge of the situation.
    Introduce yourself to them to help gain their trust.
    Explain the situation and anything you’re going to do before you do it.
    Treat the casualty with dignity and respect at all times.
5. Assess the casualty and give first aid treatment.
    If there’s more than one casualty make sure you help those with life-threatening
      conditions first.
    Use the primary survey to deal with any life-threatening conditions. When these have
      been dealt with successfully move on to the secondary survey.
6. Arrange for help if needed.
    Call 999 or 112 for an ambulance if you think it’s serious.

  Qualities of a Good First Aider

There are a whole range of skills that are beneficial for a first aider to have in order to deal with
situations in the best way possible. Some qualities of a good first aider are:

  Communication Skills

If you are able to communicate effectively with the injured person, they will be much more
likely to trust you and feel reassured. You will calm their sense of panic and make the situation a
lot easier for you both. Having strong communication skills is also advantageous should you
have to relay important information to the emergency services.

  The Ability to Work under Pressure
The demands of a first aider can range anywhere from something simple, like a cut finger, to
something a lot more serious, like a cardiac arrest. As a first aider you must be prepared for all
possibilities, and know how to react quickly to the situation. You must keep calm – panicking
will only make the situation worse – and be able to work effectively under pressure.
  Initiative and Leadership

In an emergency, time can often play a crucial part in the outcome. Being able to act quickly,
take the lead, use your initiative and trust your judgment are all vital skills.

  The Ability to Work in a Team

As well as being able to lead, it is important that you can work effectively in a team. You may
have to work alongside the emergency services, and being able to co-operate with them is vital.

  Positivity

                                                  cix
Someone who always sees the glass as half full rather than half empty is a prime candidate for a
first aider. Positivity will help you to reassure the injured person and prevent yourself from
quickly becoming mentally drained while on the job.

4.2.1.4 Learning Activities

4.2.1.4.1 Practical Activities

1. You work as a first aider in organization Y. You have received an emergency call from
    nearby highway that a public transport has been involved in an accident and the casualties are
    badly injured. Demonstrate your role as a first aider responding for that emergency once you
    reach at the scene of the accident?
4.2.1.4.2 Self-Assessment
You are provided with the following questions for self -assessment, attempt them and check your
responses
1. You are a first aider working for a busy hospital in your county. The hospital management
    has asked you to prepare a planning process for evaluating response of the casualty to the
    intervention. Which important factor would you consider while designing the planning
    process?
2. The WHO’s Health Action in Crises (HAC) has recently elaborated a five-year strategy to
    build the capacity of the health sector and communities in emergency preparedness and risk
    reduction. What are the four pillars of this strategy?
3. What are the guiding principles designed to assist planners, policymakers, and implementing
    agencies as they develop plans for emergency response and risk reduction?
4. No matter what forms that government and public administration take in addressing the
    emergency response and risk reduction, national emergency management systems should
    include which essential factors while planning for emergency response and risk reduction?
5. Why is it important to involve the Ministry of Health in all national emergency management
    potentially dealing with mass casualties?
6. What roles does the ministry of health play in the emergency management of disasters?


4.2.1.5 Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials
   Casualty department
   Functional skills laboratory
   First aid kit
   Emergency room
   Emergency room standard manuals
   Emergency trolley
   First Aid Manual.
                                                cx
   Tweezers
   Alcohol Swabs
   Antibiotic Ointment
   Bandages
   Gauze Pads
   Medical Tape
   Elastic Bandages
   Pain relievers
   Instant cold pack
   Waste disposal bins
   Personal protective equipment
   Health workers
   Presentation charts
   Flip charts




                                    cxi
4.2.1.6 References

Jevon, P. & Ewens, B. (2012) Monitoring the Critically Ill Patient, 3rd Edition, Wiley-Blackwell,
Oxford

Peitzman A.B., et al. (2012) The Trauma Manual, 2nd edition. Philadelphia, Pa., Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.

Rapid Response to Everyday Emergencies (2016) A Nurse's Guide. Philadelphia, Pa., Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.

Royal College of Nursing (2017) Record Keeping: The Facts, RCN, viewed 28 May
2018, https://www.rcn.org.uk/professional-development/publications/pub-006051




                                              cxii
4.2.1.7 MODEL ANSWERS

Self-Assessment
You are provided with the following questions for self -assessment, attempt them and check your
responses
1. You are a first aider working for a busy hospital in your county. The hospital
   management has asked you to prepare a planning process for evaluating response of the
   casualty to the intervention. Which important factor would you consider while
   designing the planning process?
    Project definition: determines the aim, objectives and scope of an emergency plan, and
       decides the tasks and the resources required to performing these tasks.
    Formation of a representative planning group: to gather the required information and to
       gain the commitment of key people and organizations, both of which will contribute to
       the successful implementation of the plan.
    Potential problem analysis: through breaking the problem into its components to examine
       risks, their causes, possible preventive strategies, response and recovery strategies, and
       trigger events for these strategies.
    Resource analysis: to identify the required resources for the response and recovery
       strategies, resources available, discrepancy between requirement and availability, and
       responsibility.
    Designation of roles and responsibilities to individuals and organizations.
    Management structure concerning the command of individual organizations and control
       across organizations.
    Developing strategies and systems for specific response and recovery.
    Documentation: The written emergency plan will consist of the outputs of each step of the
       process.
2. The WHO’s Health Action in Crises (HAC) has recently elaborated a five-year strategy
   to build the capacity of the health sector and communities in emergency preparedness
   and risk reduction. What are the four pillars of this strategy?
   • Assessing and monitoring baseline information on the status of health emergency
       preparedness and risk management at regional and country levels
   • Institutionalizing emergency preparedness and risk management in ministries of health
       and establishing an effective all-hazard/ whole-health programme for this purpose
   • Encouraging and supporting community-based emergency preparedness and risk
       management
   • Improving knowledge and skills in health emergency preparedness and response, and risk
       management.



                                              cxiii
3. What are the guiding principles designed to assist planners, policymakers, and
   implementing agencies as they develop plans for emergency response and risk
   reduction?
    Clear lines of responsibility
    All-hazard applicability
    Scalability
    Whole-of-health
    Knowledge-based
    Multi-sectoral collaboration
    National policies which enable local solutions
4. No matter what forms that government and public administration take in addressing
   the emergency response and risk reduction, national emergency management systems
   should include which essential factors while planning for emergency response and risk
   reduction?
   • Identification of lines of authority, from the national to the local level
   • Financial arrangements for funding emergency work
   • Arrangements to ensure that government and community activities are maintained (for
       example, creation of parallel or “hardened” communications systems to take over if
       normal voice or data transfer systems are affected)
   • National stockpiling of appropriate resources (including provincial or state and local
       prepositioning of stockpiles)
   • Database of national experts for advice on specific problems
   • Protocols and formal arrangements for coordinated efforts with other countries, or
       between provincial/state governments within the country.
5. Why is it important to involve the Ministry of Health in all national emergency
   management potentially dealing with mass casualties?
    Because of its expertise in the setting of health-related standards and rules and
       procedures
    Because of its normative role in the setting of health-related standards and rules and
       procedures
6. What roles does the ministry of health play in the emergency management of disasters?
    Inter-ministry cooperation
    Establishing a solid legal basis
    Establishing the baseline data for disaster management
    Hazard analysis and risk management
    Monitoring system capacity
    Surveillance, epidemiology and data collection
    Developing early warning systems
    Establishing financial and material resources
                                            cxiv
   Stockpiling- prepositioning resources (facilities, staff, supplies and equipment) close to
    risk areas.




                                            cxv
78    4.3 Learning Outcome 4:
Wind-up first aid intervention

4.3.1 Introduction to the learning outcome
This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to wind-up first aid
intervention. It includes documentation, waste management and report writing

4.3.2 Performance Standard
1. Documented first aid situation as per first aid principles
2. Cleared first aid area as per first aid principles
3. Disposed off materials in regard to SOPs
4. Stored recyclable materials as per manufacturer’s instructions and workplace policy

4.3.3 Information Sheet

Definition of Terms
Casualty- the department of a hospital providing immediate treatment for emergency cases
First Aid- is the first and immediate assistance given to any person suffering from either a minor
or serious illness or injury, with care provided to preserve life, prevent the condition from
worsening, or to promote recovery
Emergency services- are the public organizations whose job is to take quick action to deal with
emergencies when they occur, especially the fire brigade, the police, and the ambulance service.
Injury- also known as physical trauma is damage to the body caused by external force. This may
be caused by accidents, falls, hits, weapons, and other causes.
Medical waste is defined as: potentially infectious waste materials generated at health
care facilities, such as hospitals, clinics, physician's offices, dental practices, blood banks, and
veterinary hospitals/clinics, as well as medical research facilities and laboratories.



                                            Documentation
                                             Introduction
   Good record keeping is an important aspect of a health and social care professional’s role, and
   it is a fundamental part of health care.
   An accurate written record detailing all aspects of patient monitoring is important, not only
   because it forms an integral part of the of the provision of care or nursing management of the
   patient, but because it also contributes to the circulation of information amongst the different
   teams involved in the patient’s treatment or care.

   In a legal sense, documentation and record keeping is also there for the protection of the nurse
   or healthcare professional.
                                                cxvi
      A well-kept record can protect the practitioner in instances where the legal defence of their
      actions is required. Documentation also ensures a matter of professionalization and proof of
      the improvement of practices.




     Figure 17: Record Keeping and Documentation

     https://cdn.ausmed.com/ausmed-blog-images/2018/05/20180528_body.jpg




                            Types of Record-Keeping Used in Healthcare
1.  Hand-written records
2. Computer-based systems (electronic)
3. Some organizations or employers will use a combination of both.
 You’ll be expected to be able to comply with whatever requirements your employer or
 organization sets for record-keeping. That means you’ll need to:
  Ensure that you are up to date on the information systems and tools in your workplace including
    their security, confidentiality and appropriate usage;
  Protect any passwords or details given to you to enable your access to any systems;


                                                cxvii
   Make sure written records are not left in public places where unauthorized people might see
    them (including any electronic systems or displays);
   Ensure that an entry is made in the patient’s medical record whenever a health professional
    sees a patient.

                            Components of a patient’s records include:
   Medical records
   Nursing records/progress notes
   Medication charts
   Laboratory orders and reports
   Vital signs observation charts
   Handover sheets and admission
   Discharge and transfer checklists/ letters
   Patient’s assessment forms, such as nutrition or pressure area care assessment.

   Principles of Good Record Keeping
Some key factors underpin good record keeping. The patient’s records should:
 Be factual, consistent and accurate;
 Be updated as soon as possible after any recordable event;
 Provide current information on the care and condition of the patient;
 Be documented clearly in such a way that the text cannot be erased;
 Be consecutive and accurately dated, timed and all entries signed (including any alterations);
 All original entries should be legible. Draw a clear line through any changes and sign and date;
 Not include abbreviations, slang or jargon as not all workplaces or organizations will use the
   same terminology;
 Records must be stored securely and should only be destroyed following your local policy;
 Avoid meaningless phrases, speculation and offensive subjective statements/insulting or
   derogatory language;
 Identify the patient by recording patient’s name, date of birth and hospital number on each
   page of the record (three approved identifiers) or follow your local policies on how to identify
   patient’s records;
 Still be legible if photocopied or scanned.


    Common Deficiencies in Record Keeping
Poor record keeping hampers the care that patients receive and makes it difficult for healthcare
professionals to defend their practice.
The most common deficiencies in record keeping include:
 An absence of clarity
 Inaccuracies
 Spelling mistakes

                                               cxviii
   Missing information
   Failure to record action taken when a problem has been identified.

     Benefits of Good Record Keeping
Record keeping is a tool for professional practice and one that should help the care process. It is
not separate and not an optional extra to be fitted in if circumstances allow.
A record should be made as soon as possible after the patient is seen or the procedure is complete.
It’s important that accurate record is made in the patient’s notes and should include interventions
and any response to the interventions.
     The Importance of Good Record Keeping are:
 Record keeping makes the continuity of care easier;
 Record keeping promotes better communication and dissemination of information between
     members of the multi-professional team;
 Helps to address complaints or legal processes;
 Supports clinical audit, research, allocation of resources and performance planning;
 Helps to identify risks and enables the early detection of complications;
 Supports patient care and patient-centered communication;
 Supports effective clinical judgement;
 Supports delivery of services;
 Helps improve accountability;
 Shows how decisions were made relating to the patient’s care.


     Legal Issues in Record Keeping
The patient’s records are occasionally required as evidence before a court of law, or to investigate
a complaint at a local, organization level.
Sometimes records may be requested by professional governing bodies when investigating claims
related to misconduct
Therefore, you must take care about what you write. Not only will you be asked to formally explain
your records in the event of, for instance, a complaint from a patient/client, but registered nurses
have both a professional and legal duty of care.
It is therefore critical to keep up-to-date with the legal requirements and best practices of record-
keeping, proving that:
 A comprehensive nursing assessment of the patient has been undertaken including care that
     has been provided and planned;
 Relevant information is included together with any actions that have been taken in response to
     changes in patients’ conditions;
 The duty of care to the patient has been provided and that no acts or omissions have
     compromised a patient’s safety;
 Arrangements have been made for the ongoing care of the patient.


                                                cxix
                                           Waste Management
                                             Types of Waste




       Figure 18: Medical Waste for Disposal - Infection Risk Editorial Photo - Image of rubbish,
       medical waste

        https://images.app.goo.gl/NkDZCPNspmoXbKYN7

1.   Infectious waste: waste contaminated with blood and other bodily fluids (e.g. from discarded
     diagnostic samples),cultures and stocks of infectious agents from laboratory work (e.g. waste
     from autopsies and infected animals from laboratories), or waste from patients with infections
     (e.g. swabs, bandages and disposable medical devices);
2.   Pathological waste: human tissues, organs or fluids, body parts and contaminated animal
     carcasses;
3.   Sharps waste: syringes, needles, disposable scalpels and blades, etc.;
4.   Chemical waste: for example solvents and reagents used for laboratory preparations,
     disinfectants, sterilants and heavy metals contained in medical devices (e.g. mercury in broken
     thermometers) and batteries;
5.   Pharmaceutical waste: expired, unused and contaminated drugs and vaccines;

                                                    cxx
6. Cytotoxic waste: waste containing substances with genotoxic properties (i.e. highly hazardous
   substances that are, mutagenic, teratogenic or carcinogenic), such as cytotoxic drugs used in
   cancer treatment and their metabolites;
7. Radioactive waste: such as products contaminated by radionuclides including radioactive
   diagnostic material or radio therapeutic materials; and
8. Non-hazardous or general waste: waste that does not pose any particular biological, chemical,
   radioactive or physical hazard.

     The major sources of health-care waste are:

1.   hospitals and other health facilities
2.   laboratories and research centers
3.   mortuary and autopsy centers
4.   animal research and testing laboratories
5.   blood banks and collection services
6.   nursing homes for the elderly

        Health Care Risks of Hospital Wastes
1.   Potentially harmful microorganisms that can infect hospital patients, health workers and the
     general public
2.   Drug-resistant microorganisms which spread from health facilities into the environment.
3.   Sharps-inflicted injuries;
4.   Toxic exposure to pharmaceutical products, in particular, antibiotics and cytotoxic drugs released
     into the surrounding environment, and to substances such as mercury or dioxins, during the
     handling or incineration of health care wastes;
5.   Chemical burns arising in the context of disinfection, sterilization or waste treatment activities;
6.   Air pollution arising as a result of the release of particulate matter during medical waste
     incineration;
7.   Thermal injuries occurring in conjunction with open burning and the operation of medical waste
     incinerators; and
8.   Radiation burns.

     Environmental Impact of Waste Disposal and Treatment
1. The disposal of untreated health care wastes in landfills can lead to the contamination of
   drinking, surface, and ground waters if those landfills are not properly constructed.
2. The treatment of health care wastes with chemical disinfectants can result in the release of
   chemical substances into the environment if those substances are not handled, stored and
   disposed in an environmentally sound manner.
3. Incineration of waste has been widely practiced, but inadequate incineration or the incineration
   of unsuitable materials results in the release of pollutants into the air and in the generation of ash

                                                     cxxi
   residue. Incinerated materials containing or treated with chlorine can generate dioxins and
   furans, which are human carcinogens and have been associated with a range of adverse health
   effects. Incineration of heavy metals or materials with high metal content (in particular lead,
   mercury and cadmium) can lead to the spread of toxic metals in the environment.
4. Only modern incinerators operating at 850-1100 °C and fitted with special gas-cleaning
   equipment are able to comply with the international emission standards for dioxins and furans.
5. Alternatives to incineration such as autoclaving, microwaving, steam treatment integrated with
   internal mixing, which minimize the formation and release of chemicals or hazardous emissions
   should be given consideration in settings where there are sufficient resources to operate and
   maintain such systems and dispose of the treated waste.

                                  Waste management: Reasons for Failure
1.   Lack of awareness about the health hazards related to health-care waste
2.   Inadequate training in proper waste management
3.   Absence of waste management and disposal systems
4.   Insufficient financial and human resources and the low priority given to the topic are the most
     common problems connected with health-care waste.
5.   Many countries either do not have appropriate regulations, or do not enforce them.

                                             The Way Forward

     The management of health-care waste requires increased attention and diligence to avoid adverse
     health outcomes associated with poor practice, including exposure to infectious agents and toxic
     substances.

     Key elements in improving health-care waste management are:

1.   Promoting practices that reduce the volume of wastes generated and ensure proposer waste
     segregation;
2.   Developing strategies and systems along with strong oversight and regulation to incrementally
     improve waste segregation, destruction and disposal practices with the ultimate aim of meeting
     national and international standards;
3.   Where feasible, favoring the safe and environmentally sound treatment of hazardous health care
     wastes (e,g, by autoclaving, microwaving, steam treatment integrated with internal mixing, and
     chemical treatment) over medical waste incineration;
4.   Building a comprehensive system, addressing responsibilities, resource allocation, handling and
     disposal. This is a long-term process, sustained by gradual improvements;
5.   Raising awareness of the risks related to health-care waste, and of safe practices; and
6.   Selecting safe and environmentally-friendly management options, to protect people from hazards
     when collecting, handling, storing, transporting, treating or disposing of waste.

                                                    cxxii
                                               WHO Response
    WHO developed the first global and comprehensive guidance document, Safe management of
     wastes from health-care activities, now in its second edition and more recently a short guide that
     summarizes the key elements.

     Safe management of wastes from health-care activities

    The guide addresses aspects such as;

        1.   Regulatory framework
        2.   Planning issues
        3.   Waste minimization and recycling
        4.   Handling of waste
        5.   Storage and transportation
        6.   Treatment and disposal options
        7.   Training.

    The document is aimed at managers of hospitals and other health-care facilities, policy makers,
     public health professionals and managers involved in waste management.
    In addition, as part of monitoring Sustainable Development Goal 6 on safely managed water and
     sanitation, the WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme will regularly report on safe
     management of health care waste as part of wider monitoring efforts on water and sanitation in
     health care facilities.

     Waste Segregation

    Segregation means separating different wastes into different color-coded bins with liners or
     sharps containers at locations where they are generated, and it is always the first and the most
     important activity in the hospital set up.

     Color Coded Waste Bins
1.   Red bin—you put highly infectious wastes like blood, blood products, tissues, specimens, blood
     giving sets, tooth, amputated body parts etc.
2.   Yellow bin—you put infectious wastes like fluid giving sets, used gloves, empty syringes, vials,
     ampules, tubing, wipes, and empty IVs etc.
3.   White bin—you put the food remains e.g. banana peels, fruit remains etc.
4.   Black Bin—you put waste papers like drugs cartons and packages




                                                    cxxiii
  Figure 19: Color Coded Waste Bins


https://im.indiatimes.in/content/itimes/photo/2015/Jan/6/1420535398-color-coded-waste-
bins-iabv20.jpg?w=1400&h=1050&cc=1




                                          cxxiv
          Figure 20: Sharps Containers - Infection Prevention & Control Associates

     https://images.app.goo.gl/DuxmDTe5zws3MCBc7




       Treatment and Disposal of Medical Waste
     The primary methods of treatment and disposal of medical waste are:

1.   Incineration
2.   Autoclaves
3.   Mechanical/Chemical Disinfection
4.   Microwave
5.   Irradiation
6.   Vitrification

     1.  Incineration
     Incineration is the controlled burning of the medical waste in a dedicated incinerator. Among
     industry professionals, these units are often referred to as hospital/medical/infectious waste
     incinerators (HMIWIs).

     2.    Autoclaves for Medical Waste
                                                    cxxv
Autoclaves are closed chambers that apply heat and sometimes pressure and steam, over a period
of time to sterilize medical equipment. Autoclaves have been used for a century to sterilize
medical instruments for re-use. Surgical knives and clamps, for instance, are put in autoclaves
for sterilization.

3.  Mechanical Processing and Chemical Disinfection
Mechanical processing can be grinding, shredding, and/or compacting Mechanical treatment
does not kill pathogens or disinfect equipment, but it can reduce waste volume in preparation of
further treatment or disposal.

Chemical disinfection, primarily through the use of chlorine compounds, kills microorganisms in
medical waste and can often oxidize hazardous chemical constituents. Chlorine bleach has been
used for disinfecting processes for years – you might use it to clean your underwear and kill the
E.coli.

4.  Microwave
Microwave radiation is used to treat wastewater sludge and as a heat source to treat medical
waste. Microwave treatment units can be either on-site installations or mobile treatment vehicles.
The processing usually includes front-end shredding of the waste, both to increase the efficacy of
the microwave treatment and to reduce the volume of the end waste for disposal. If the waste is
dry, water is introduced and the wet waste is introduced to the microwave chamber.

5.  Irradiation
Irradiation disinfects waste by exposing it to gamma rays that are fatal to bacteria. A radioactive
isotope of cobalt is employed. This is basically the same radiation source used for radiation
treatment of cancer. In cancer treatment, radiation is intended to kill the malignant cells. In
irradiation for sterilization of equipment or treatment of waste, the radiation is intended to kill
pathogens.

6.   Vitrification
Although it is rarely used, vitrification can be an effective treatment for medical waste. The solid
waste is mixed in when glass is formed (vitrification means production of glass). The high
temperatures kill pathogens and some combustible material may burn or pyrolyze, resulting in an
off-gas. Remaining material is encapsulated in glass, which has a very low diffusivity. There is
little danger of hazardous materials leaching out of glass in significant quantities. The vitrified
waste can therefore be put in a landfill with confidence.




                                               cxxvi
                                           Report Writing
A report is a short, sharp, concise document which is written for a particular purpose and
audience. It generally sets outs and analyses a situation or problem, often making
recommendations for future action. It is a factual paper, and needs to be clear and well-structured.
Reports generally involve presenting your investigation and analysis of information or an issue,
recommending actions and making proposals.
Requirements for the precise form and content of a report will vary between organization and
departments and in study between courses, from tutor to tutor, as well as between subjects, so it’s
worth finding out if there are any specific guidelines before you start.
There are many different types of reports, including business, scientific and research reports, but
the basic steps for writing them are the same. These are outlined below.
                                         Steps of Report Writing
    Step 1: Decide on the 'Terms of reference'
    Step 2: Decide on the procedure
    Step 3: Find the information
    Step 4: Decide on the structure
    Step 5: Draft the first part of your report
    Step 6: Analyze your findings and draw conclusions
    Step 7: Make recommendations
    Step 8: Draft the executive summary and table of contents
    Step 9: Compile a reference list
    Step 10: Revise your draft report

    Step 1: Decide on the 'Terms of reference'
To decide on the terms of reference for your report, read your instructions and any other
information you've been given about the report, and think about the purpose of the report:
     What is it about?
     What exactly is needed?
     Why is it needed?
     When do I need to do it?
     Who is it for, or who is it aimed at?
This will help you draft your Terms of reference.
       Step 2: Decide on the procedure
This means planning your investigation or research, and how you'll write the report. Ask
yourself:
     What information do I need?
     Do I need to do any background reading?

                                               cxxvii
       What articles or documents do I need?
     Do I need to contact the library for assistance?
     Do I need to interview or observe people?
     Do I have to record data?
     How will I go about this?
Answering these questions will help you draft the procedure section of your report, which
outlines the steps you've taken to carry out the investigation.
        Step 3: Find the information
The next step is to find the information you need for your report. To do this you may need to
read written material, observe people or activities, and/or talk to people.
Make sure the information you find is relevant and appropriate. Check the assessment
requirements and guidelines and the marking schedule to make sure you're on the right track. If
you're not sure how the marks will be assigned contact your lecturer.
What you find out will form the basis, or main body, of your report – the findings.
        Step 4: Decide on the structure
Reports generally have a similar structure, but some details may differ. How they differ usually
depends on:
     The type of report – if it is a research report, laboratory report, business report,
        investigative report, etc.
     How formal the report has to be.
     The length of the report.
        Depending on the type of report, the structure can include:
     A title page.
     Executive summary.
     Contents.
     An introduction.
     Terms of reference.
     Procedure.
     Findings.
     Conclusions.
     Recommendations.
     References/Bibliography.
     Appendices.
     The sections, of a report usually have headings and subheadings, which are usually
        numbered
        Step 5: Draft the first part of your report
Once you have your structure, write down the headings and start to fill these in with the
information you have gathered so far. By now you should be able to draft the terms of reference,
procedure and findings, and start to work out what will go in the report’s appendix.


                                             cxxviii
Findings- The findings are result of your reading, observations, interviews and investigation.
They form the basis of your report. Depending on the type of report you are writing, you may
also wish to include photos, tables or graphs to make your report more readable and/or easier to
follow.
Appendices-- As you are writing your draft decide what information will go in the appendix.
These are used for information that:
 Is too long to include in the body of the report, or
 Supplements or complements the information in the report. For example, brochures,
    spreadsheets or large tables.
          Step 6: Analyze your findings and draw conclusions
The conclusion is where you analyze your findings and interpret what you have found. To do
this, read through your findings and ask yourself:
     What have I found?
     What's significant or important about my findings?
     What do my findings suggest?
For example, your conclusion may describe how the information you collected explains why the
situation occurred, what this means for the organization, and what will happen if the situation
continues (or doesn't continue).
Don’t include any new information in the conclusion.
         Step 7: Make recommendations
Recommendations are what you think the solution to the problem is and/or what you think
should happen next. To help you decide what to recommend:
     Reread your findings and conclusions.
     Think about what you want the person who asked for the report should to do or not do;
         what actions should they carry out?
     Check that your recommendations are practical and are based logically on your
         conclusions.
     Ensure you include enough detail for the reader to know what needs to be done and who
         should do it.
Your recommendations should be written as a numbered list, and ordered from most to least
important.
         Step 8: Draft the executive summary and table of contents
Some reports require an executive summary and/or list of contents. Even though these two
sections come near the beginning of the report you won't be able to do them until you have
finished it, and have your structure and recommendations finalized.
An executive summary is usually about 100 words long. It tells the readers what the report is
about, and summarize the recommendations.
         Step 9: Compile a reference list
This is a list of all the sources you've referred to in the report and uses APA referencing.
         Step 10: Revise your draft report
                                              cxxix
It is always important to revise your work. Things you need to check include:
      If you have done what you were asked to do. Check the assignment question, the
         instructions/guidelines and the marking schedule to make sure.
      That the required sections are included, and are in the correct order.
      That your information is accurate, with no gaps.
      If your argument is logical. Does the information you present support your conclusions
         and recommendations?
      That all terms, symbols and abbreviations used have been explained.
      That any diagrams, tables, graphs and illustrations are numbered and labeled.
      That the formatting is correct, including your numbering, headings, are consistent
         throughout the report.
      That the report reads well, and your writing is as clear and effective as possible.
You might need to prepare several drafts before you are satisfied. If possible, get someone else to
check your report.

  4.3.4 Learning Activities

  4.3.4.1 Practical Activities

1. You are in the casualty where you provide first aid services to patients on daily basis but
   there is a problem of waste segregation in your unit. Perform waste segregation in your unit
   according to WHO standard?

4.3.4.2 Self-Assessment
You are provided with the following questions for self -assessment, attempt them and check your
responses
1. You are working in the emergency room in organization X. What are the principles of good
    record keeping?
2. What are the components of a patient’s record?
3. What is the importance of good record keeping?
4. Hospital wastes if not well handled can pose a great danger to the health workers. What are
    some of the health care risks of hospital wastes?
5. What are some of the key elements in improving health-care waste management?
6. Medical wastes need prompt treatment and disposal using the most effective methods and
    technology to ensure a safe environment. As a health worker, what are the primary methods
    of treatment and disposal of medical wastes?
7. You have been tasked with the responsibility of writing a medical report about the operation
    in your unit. What are the steps of report writing that can ensure you write a good report?



                                               cxxx
4.3.5 Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials
 Casualty department
 Functional skills laboratory
 First aid kit
 Emergency room
 Emergency room standard manuals
 Emergency trolley
 First Aid Manual.
 Tweezers
 Alcohol Swabs
   Antibiotic Ointment
   Bandages
   Gauze Pads
   Medical Tape
   Elastic Bandages
   Pain relievers
   Instant cold pack
   Waste disposal bins
   Personal protective equipment
   Health workers
   Presentation charts
   Flip charts




                                        cxxxi
4.3.6 References

Jevon, P. & Ewens, B. (2012) Monitoring the Critically Ill Patient, 3rd Edition, Wiley-Blackwell,
Oxford

Peitzman A.B., et al. (2012) The Trauma Manual, 2nd edition. Philadelphia, Pa., Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.

Rapid Response to Everyday Emergencies (2016) A Nurse's Guide. Philadelphia, Pa., Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins.

Royal College of Nursing (2017) Record Keeping: The Facts, RCN, viewed 28 May
2018, https://www.rcn.org.uk/professional-development/publications/pub-006051




                                              cxxxii
4.3.7 MODEL ANSWERS

Self-Assessment
You are provided with the following questions for self -assessment, attempt them and check your
responses



1. You are working in the emergency room in organization X. What are the principles of
   good record keeping?
    Be factual, consistent and accurate;
    Be updated as soon as possible after any recordable event;
    Provide current information on the care and condition of the patient;
    Be documented clearly in such a way that the text cannot be erased;
    Be consecutive and accurately dated, timed and all entries signed (including any
      alterations);
    All original entries should be legible. Draw a clear line through any changes and sign and
      date;
    Not include abbreviations, slang or jargon as not all workplaces or organizations will use
      the same terminology;
    Records must be stored securely and should only be destroyed following your local policy;
    Avoid meaningless phrases, speculation and offensive subjective statements/insulting or
      derogatory language;
    Identify the patient by recording patient’s name, date of birth and hospital number on each
      page of the record (three approved identifiers) or follow your local policies on how to
      identify patient’s records;
    Still be legible if photocopied or scanned.
2. What are the components of a patient’s record?
    Medical records
    Nursing records/progress notes
    Medication charts
    Laboratory orders and reports
    Vital signs observation charts
    Handover sheets and admission
    Discharge and transfer checklists/ letters
    Patient’s assessment forms, such as nutrition or pressure area care assessment.
3. What is the importance of good record keeping?
    Record keeping makes the continuity of care easier;
    Record keeping promotes better communication and dissemination of information between
      members of the multi-professional team;
    Helps to address complaints or legal processes;
                                             cxxxiii
     Supports clinical audit, research, allocation of resources and performance planning;
    Helps to identify risks and enables the early detection of complications;
    Supports patient care and patient-centered communication;
    Supports effective clinical judgement;
    Supports delivery of services;
    Helps improve accountability;
    Shows how decisions were made relating to the patient’s care.
4. Hospital wastes if not well handled can pose a great danger to the health workers. What
   are some of the health care risks of hospital wastes?
    Potentially harmful microorganisms that can infect hospital patients, health workers and
      the general public
    Drug-resistant microorganisms which spread from health facilities into the environment.
    Sharps-inflicted injuries;
    Toxic exposure to pharmaceutical products, in particular, antibiotics and cytotoxic drugs
      released into the surrounding environment, and to substances such as mercury or dioxins,
      during the handling or incineration of health care wastes;
    Chemical burns arising in the context of disinfection, sterilization or waste treatment
      activities;
    Air pollution arising as a result of the release of particulate matter during medical waste
      incineration;
    Thermal injuries occurring in conjunction with open burning and the operation of medical
      waste incinerators; and
    Radiation burns.


5. What are some of the key elements in improving health-care waste management?

      Promoting practices that reduce the volume of wastes generated and ensure proposer
       waste segregation;
      Developing strategies and systems along with strong oversight and regulation to
       incrementally improve waste segregation, destruction and disposal practices with the
       ultimate aim of meeting national and international standards;
      Where feasible, favoring the safe and environmentally sound treatment of hazardous
       health care wastes (e,g, by autoclaving, microwaving, steam treatment integrated with
       internal mixing, and chemical treatment) over medical waste incineration;
      Building a comprehensive system, addressing responsibilities, resource allocation,
       handling and disposal. This is a long-term process, sustained by gradual improvements;
      Raising awareness of the risks related to health-care waste, and of safe practices; and
      Selecting safe and environmentally-friendly management options, to protect people from
       hazards when collecting, handling, storing, transporting, treating or disposing of waste.


                                             cxxxiv
6. Medical wastes need prompt treatment and disposal using the most effective methods
   and technology to ensure a safe environment. As a health worker, what are the primary
   methods of treatment and disposal of medical wastes?
    Incineration
    Autoclaves
    Mechanical/Chemical Disinfection
    Microwave
    Irradiation
    Vitrification
7. You have been tasked with the responsibility of writing a medical report about the
   operation in your unit. What are the steps of report writing that can ensure you write a
   good report?
    Step 1: Decide on the 'Terms of reference'
    Step 2: Decide on the procedure
    Step 3: Find the information
    Step 4: Decide on the structure
    Step 5: Draft the first part of your report
    Step 6: Analyze your findings and draw conclusions
    Step 7: Make recommendations
    Step 8: Draft the executive summary and table of contents
    Step 9: Compile a reference list
    Step 10: Revise your draft report




                                           cxxxv
CHAPTER 5




CHAPTER 6




            cxxxvi
cxxxvii
                          CHAPTER SIX
     PROVISION OF HEALTH EDUCATION AND PROMOTION SERVICES
UNIT CODE: HE/CU/TT/CC/06/6/A


Relationship to Occupational Standards: Provide Health Education and Promotion Services

Introduction to unit of learning
This unit specifies the competencies required to Provide Health Education and Promotion. It
involves identifying and assessing health education and promotion needs, developing objectives,
planning, implementing, evaluating and documenting health promotion and education activities.
Its main objective is to enlighten a person or a community on healthcare.

Summary of Learning Outcomes
 1. Carry out needs’ assessment on health education and promotion
 2. Develop objectives for health education and promotion
 3. Plan health education and promotion
 4. Implement action plan for health education and promotion
 5. Monitor and evaluate health education and promotion
 6. Document health education and promotion




                                           cxxxviii
  1.1 Learning Outcomes 1: Carry out needs’ assessment for health education and promotion
  Introduction to the learning outcome
  This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to conduct dietary surveys.
  It comprises basics community health assessment techniques, assessing health needs of a patient,
  communication skills in health education and promotion, recording and Presentation assessment
  reports, learning activities, self-assessment questions and answers, learning activities, tools,
  equipment, supplies and materials and references.

  1.3. Performance Standard
1.3.1 Tools for needs assessment are identified and gathered as per work place policy and
        WHO standards.
1.3.2 Health education and promotion need is assessed as per WHO standards
1.3.3 Needs assessment report is prepared and filed as per work place policy and WHO
        standards

                                   79      1.4 Information Sheet
     1.4.1 Basics community health assessment techniques
  Community health assessments (CHAs) include a combination of quantitative demographic and
  health data as well as qualitative data that reflects the experiences and opinions of community
  stakeholders. Summarize and synthesize these data to develop a picture of overall community
  health and to highlight the particular health needs of various populations in your community.
  Key Components
  Defining demographic indicators - Indicators are the measures describing a community’s health
  that are related to desired health outcomes; they should allow for identification of health
  inequities by geography, age, race/ethnicity and socioeconomic status when feasible. Before
  gathering data, identify meaningful indicators of health and health determinants.
  Detecting disparities - Aggregate data about a population can obscure subpopulation
  differences. Electronic health record (EHR) data may be useful for tracking and stratifying
  health status by race, ethnicity and language, as well as other sociodemographic characteristics
  (e.g., income, disability or veteran status, sexual orientation and gender).
  Reaching populations facing inequities - Some segments of a population—such as individuals
  who lack a stable address or who do not speak English—may not be represented in existing data.
  Make a specific effort to engage individuals from those populations. Consider where these
  individuals congregate and conduct targeted outreach in these locations.

Apply research principles to the CHA process

  CHA will include a combination of primary data collected and secondary data that comes from
  other sources, such as the local health department. With both primary and secondary sources,
  there are two main types of data:

                                                1
    a. Quantitative: numerical population data that can establish a benchmark for health
       indicators and conditions.
    b. Qualitative: descriptive data based on opinions and perceptions that can illustrate how
       people think or feel; typically gathered from interviews, focus groups, photovoice,
       participatory action research or town hall meetings.
  Community-based participatory research (CBPR) methodology is particularly applicable to the
  CHA process. It is a collaborative approach to research that equitably involves all partners in
  the research process, recognizing the unique strengths that each partner brings and facilitating
  collaborative partnership through the research. CBPR principles align well with the CHA
  process.
  Table 3: Community-based participatory research (CBPR) methodology

 CBPR Principles                                     Relation to CHA Process

 Recognizes community as a unit of identity          The unit of analysis for CHAs is the
                                                     geographic community.
 Facilitates collaborative partnerships in all       CHA developers can foster long-term,
 phases of the research                              collaborative partnerships with community
                                                     members and stakeholders throughout the
                                                     process.
 Integrates knowledge and action for the             The hospital gains a more nuanced
 mutual benefit of all partners                      perspective of community health issues.
 Promotes a co-learning and empowering               Engaging the community throughout the CHA
 process that attends to social inequalities         process promotes a sense of joint ownership
                                                     and equity between the hospital and
                                                     community.
 Involves a cyclical and iterative process           The CHA process is an ongoing cycle that
                                                     should include periodic reflection and course
                                                     correction.
 Addresses health from positive and ecological       CHA developers are encouraged to target the
 perspectives                                        social determinants of health in the
                                                     community in order to address the upstream
                                                     factors affecting health.
 Disseminates findings and knowledge gained          CHA results are publicly available and widely
 to all partners                                     distributed to participants, stakeholders and
                                                     the community at large.


Develop a data strategy

  When planning the data collection process, the CHA advisory committee can discuss the
  following considerations:
    Is this the hospital’s first CHA or an update from previously published CHAs?
    Will the collected data be new, updated from existing data or both?
                                                 2
      What requirements need to be fulfilled?
      Is the hospital operating alone or with other partners?
      Is the CHA representing one community, one hospital or multiple jurisdictions?
      Will you be conducting the CHA in partnership with local health departments or other
       hospitals?
    Is there a system in place to store and manage CHA data?
    Does the hospital require additional support to compile, assess and publish the data?
    What level of geographic granularity is needed to identify disparities and unmet needs?
  The hospital can call on both internal and community resources to advise on data collection and
  provide data. This can include:
    Hospital staff
    Public health departments
    Local colleges/universities
    Research organizations
    Community volunteers
    Consulting firms
    Public health institutes
Decide what data to include

  Comprehensive CHAs include a thorough review of the statistics regarding a range of population
  health indicators. Data collected and analyzed should reflect the clinical and non-clinical factors
  that impact health. Guidelines for key metrics can be found in the County Health Rankings &
  Roadmaps Model:




                                                 3
  Figure 21: County Health Rankings & Roadmaps Model

Source: University of Wisconsin Population Health Institute. (2016). County Health Rankings &
Roadmaps: Our approach. Accessed at https://www.countyhealthrankings.org/explore-health-
rankings/measures-data-sources/county-health-rankings-model

  Collect secondary quantitative data
  Demographic and health data are compiled by local and state health departments as well as by
  national sources such as County Health Rankings & Roadmaps, Community Commons and the
  Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Selection of data sources will depend in part
  on the definition of your hospital’s geographic service area. Local health department
  epidemiologists can assist with ensuring data quality and validity. Input from local community

                                               4
  and neighborhood groups on access to health care, social determinants of health and other health
  conditions can also enhance the quality of data collected, as it is coming directly from the
  community.

National data sets can help you identify disparities at the local level.

  Access electronic health record data
  Electronic Health Record (EHR) data can provide a unique window into the health needs of
  community members who have received care. Accessing the aggregate EHR data will require
  working with the IT department to see what data they can pull from the data warehouse.
  Considerations include:
    Benchmarking patient data against the health indicators in the hospital’s service area
    Aligning key indicators for the CHA with the fields being collected in the EHR
    Linking patient records across the continuum of care
    Tracking emergency department use
    Documenting behavioral health issues and comorbidities with other chronic diseases in
       the EHR
Collect community-engaged primary data

  Information not available in existing databases should be collected directly from your
  community. This is an ideal opportunity to engage your community. There are four main
  approaches to obtaining primary data:
     Community surveys: written surveys distributed widely to the community on paper
        and/or online
     Key stakeholder interviews: one-on-one conversations between trained facilitators and
        community stakeholders
     Focus groups: group-based conversations of 5 to 10 participants led by a trained
        facilitator
     Town hall meetings: community-wide meetings led by a trained facilitator
  Guiding principles to consider when soliciting the opinions of community members about their
  community health needs include:
  Involve community members in developing surveys or interview guides to ensure that questions
  are culturally appropriate, are understandable and will elicit desired responses. Do not use health
  care jargon, as most people outside of the field will not understand it.
  When developing questions, make sure the questions accurately and directly address what is
  being measured.
  Keep the wording of questions simple, with clearly defined terms. Avoid leading questions, two-
  part questions or questions that make assumptions about the respondent.
  Test the questions on a small sample of potential respondents so they can give feedback and
  identify any confusing terms or suggest modifications.

                                                  5
Keep surveys short to reduce the time burden on the respondents and increase the response rate.
Include only relevant, necessary questions.
Collect responses from a large and diverse group of individuals who are representative of the
community served. If there is a significant non-English-speaking population, consider
approaches that would allow those individuals to participate in their native language.
Train individuals who will be conducting interviews and focus groups to perform this work
consistently and neutrally so as not to influence responses.
Develop standard processes for analyzing data. This is particularly important when coding
qualitative data, as it is a fairly subjective process.
Below are some suggested practices for engaging community members in the data collection
process:
Table 4: Community Surveys

 Community Surveys
 Content      and
 format            Assure respondents of confidentiality.
                   Collect race, ethnicity and language data in a culturally appropriate
                   manner.
                   Ensure that survey questions are culturally appropriate and at a literacy
                   level and language that respondents can understand.
                   Review the survey draft with community members to see what needs to
                   be modified.
                   Provide versions of the survey in the languages spoken by community
                   members.
                   Consider using or modifying a validated survey instrument or questions.
                   Assess regularity of health care usage as frequent users may have a
                   unique perspective.
                   Allow space for qualitative answers.
                   Provide the option for respondents to be contacted for further
                   involvement in the CHA process.
                   Distribute the survey online, on paper or both. Consider using both
                   methods if there are major segments of the community’s population
                   who do not have internet access.
                   Consider oversampling vulnerable populations since interventions
 Participants      would likely need to be focused on the needs of those groups.
                   Distribute the survey where people live, work, learn and play—at
                   churches, local businesses, health fairs, etc.
                   Widely advertise the survey using social media, newspaper
                   advertisements, etc.
                   Engage community leaders to encourage participation in the survey
                   among their constituents.
                   Consider specifically surveying the patient population.


                                             6
Table 5: Key Stakeholder Interviews

 Key Stakeholder Interviews
 Participants        Consider whom to interview:

                    Interview stakeholders from a variety of sectors in the community.

                    Engage clinicians—including physicians, nurses, community health
                    workers, etc.—for interviews as they likely have insights into the
                    health needs of patients in the hospital.

                    Interview individuals representative of the community, including
                    subgroups experiencing health disparities.

                    Supplement topic areas with sparse secondary data by interviewing
                    community stakeholders knowledgeable in that area.

                    Find innovative ways to recruit for stakeholder interviews:

                    Ask community leaders if they know and could provide connections to
                    potential participants with the characteristics being targeted.
                    Engage clinicians in hospitals or any associated medical groups and
                    practices to identify patients for interviews.
                    Talk to hospitals’ patient and family advisory councils (PFACs).
                    Make the location easily accessible; consider factors such as proximity
                    to public transportation, time of day, availability of parking, child care,
 Location           etc.
                    Hold the interviews in a neutral space (i.e., not the hospital).
                    Consider online or phone interviews to reduce barriers to participation.
                    Ensure that the interview facilitator is culturally competent and speaks
 Facilitator        the language(s) spoken by the interviewees.
                    Use a facilitator who is well trained in moderating interviews,
                    including keeping participants on topic and maintaining a neutral
                    position.
 Developing         Develop an interview guide so the same questions are asked across all
 interview          interviews.
                    Ask short and open-ended questions to encourage dialogue on various
 questions          topics.
                    Review the list of questions ahead of time with community members
                    to ensure that questions are culturally appropriate and at a level that
                    participants would be able to understand.
                    Be aware that the interview facilitator cannot ask people to identify
                    their health conditions.
                    If possible, provide the questions to attendees ahead of time.
                                            7
 Conducting the
 interviews        Explain to participants how their input will be used.
                   Establish confidentiality of the participants’ responses. Especially in
                   small communities, participants may be worried about their names
                   being attached to their comments.
                   Provide an estimated timeline of when final results will be shared.
                   Ask whether the individual would like to be involved in future stages
                   of the CHA and set the process for continued engagement.
                   Establish realistic expectations for what the hospital and partners can
                   do to address community needs.


Table 6: Focus Groups

 Focus Groups
                   Consider whom to sample: a cross-section of the whole community
 Participants      and/or more targeted groups?
                   Contemplate recruiting from existing groups (e.g., PFACs, church
                   groups).
                   Find innovative ways to recruit for focus groups where people live,
                   learn, work and play (e.g., advertisements on social media, in
                   newspapers, on the radio, at churches, local businesses, etc.).
                   Engage clinicians to identify patients for focus groups.
                   Consider members of the community who may not be easily reached
                   and brainstorm how they can be recruited.
                   Encourage attendance through reminder notices.
                   Limit focus groups to 10 or fewer participants to ensure that
                   everyone’s opinions can be heard.
                   Make the location easily accessible for community members. Consider
                   factors such as proximity to public transportation, time of day,
 Location          availability of parking, child care, etc.
                   Hold the focus groups in a neutral space (i.e., not the hospital).
                   Consider holding virtual or phone focus groups to reduce barriers to
                   participation.
                   Focus groups should typically last no longer than 90 minutes.
                   Use a facilitator who is well trained in moderating focus groups,
                   including keeping participants on topic, maintaining a neutral position,
 Facilitator       and making sure that everyone participates and is listened to.
                   Ensure the facilitator is culturally competent and speaks the
                   language(s) spoken by attendees.
                   Consider using a facilitator from a neutral third party, so participants
                   feel more comfortable.
 Developing        Develop a focus group question guide, so the same questions are asked
 focus             across multiple focus groups.


                                          8
                      Ask short and open-ended questions to encourage dialogue on various
 group questions      topics.
                      Review the list of questions ahead of time with community members
                      to ensure that questions are culturally appropriate and at a level that
                      participants would be able to understand.
                      If possible, provide the questions to attendees ahead of time.
                      Refrain from asking very sensitive questions that individuals would
                      not want to share in a group.
                      Establish confidentiality of the participants’ responses. Especially in
                      small communities, participants can be concerned about their names
 Conducting the       being attached to their comments.
 focus groups         Explain to participants how their input will be used.
                      Give participants an estimated timeline of when results will be shared.
                      Establish realistic expectations for what the hospital and partners can
                      do to address community needs.
                      Ask whether the individual would like to be involved in future stages
                      of the CHA and set the process for continued engagement.




Table 7: Town Hall Meetings

 Town Hall Meetings
                      Advertise the meetings where people live, work, learn and play using
                      social media, newspapers, radio, announcements and flyers, local
 Participants         organizations, support groups, PFACs, etc.
                      If possible, offer child care for participants.
                      Explain why the CHA is relevant for the whole community.
                      Make the location easily accessible for community members. Consider
                      factors such as proximity to public transportation, time of day,
 Location             availability of parking, child care, etc.
                      Hold the meetings in a neutral space (i.e., not the hospital).
                      Consider coordinating the meeting with existing community or town
                      meetings.
 Finding a            Ensure that the facilitator is culturally competent, speaks the languages
 facilitator          spoken by community members and is sensitive to attendees’ needs.
                      The facilitator should be well trained in moderating community
                      meetings, including keeping participants on topic, ensuring that louder
                      voices do not drown out others, and maintaining a neutral position.
 Developing an        Develop a draft agenda and questions and, if possible, distribute them
 agenda               to attendees ahead of time.
                      Ask participants open-ended questions to encourage dialogue about
 and questions        various topics.
                                             9
                      Review the list of questions ahead of time with community members
                      to ensure that questions are culturally appropriate and at a level that
                      participants would be able to understand.
 Meeting              Tell all participants how their feedback will be used and when results
 logistics            will be shared.
                      Consider using voting devices (clickers, cell phone apps, etc.) to gain
                      input from more community members, especially those who may not
                      feel comfortable speaking up in a public setting.
                      Establish realistic expectations for what the hospital and partners can
                      do to address community needs.
                      Provide the option for participants to be contacted for further
                      involvement in the CHA process; this is an easy way to identify
                      individuals who desire increased engagement.

   1.4.2 Assessing health needs of a patient
Health Needs Assessment
 A health needs assessment (HNA) is a systematic method of identifying unmet health and health
care needs of a population and making changes to meet those unmet needs. Health needs
assessments are used to improve health, commissioning of healthcare and other service
planning, policy making and priority setting - like in a Joint Strategic Needs Assessment (JSNA)
that local authorities and CCGs have to produce.
Health needs assessments lead to agreed priorities and resource allocation that will improve
health, planning of services and address health inequalities. They also encourage partnership
work and innovation and enable the target population to contribute.
Heath needs assessments are the back bone of public health work so it is important to know how
to conduct them. There are a number of ways to conduct a HNA including compartive and
corporative but the most common approach is called 'epidemiologically based' where you
combine epidemiology with cost effectiveness and effectiveness of interventions. It is worth
noting that the aim of a HNA is to aid decision making and to promote action so it is important
that the emphasis is on what actions you are reccommended. As a result, many public health
teams have moved away from producing a book of work that sits on a shelf to powerpoint
presentations or factsheets. This helps them to influence decision makers and get public health
action done. The following is my distilled version of a HNA. Remember to add an executive
summary and that a lot of decision makers are really busy so keep your HNA brief and to the
point with your recommendations jumping out of the page.
Sections of a Health Needs Assessment
  1. State your aim - why are you doing the HNA?
  2. Define the problem to be addressed in a defined population (and any sub-categories of
      the problem)
  3. Describe the size and nature of the problem - this is your epidemiology section covering
      who's affected, risk factors, health equalities etc.
  4. Describe the current services available to address this problem
                                             10
  5. Synthesize and summarize the evidence from the literature on the interventions available
      (Literature review).
  6. Summarize your findings from stakeholders - what are the viewpoints of the health
      professionals and others involved in providing services or interventions on this issue?
      (Usually this is in the form of a stakeholders workshop).
  7. Summarize your findings from users/patients - what do patients want and need? (This
      can be from focus groups).
  8. Summarize cost-effective solutions and resource implications (economic appraisal)
  9. Recommendations for action
  10. Identify the indicators and outcomes needed to evaluate change.
Further Reading: https://www.k4health.org/sites/default/files/migra...,
http://www.bmj.com/specialties/health-needs-assess...
Most doctors are used to assessing the health needs of their individual patients. Through
professional training and clinical experience a systematic approach to this assessment has been
developed and for use before start of treatment that is believed to be effective. Such a systematic
approach has often been missing when it comes to assessing the health needs of a local or
practice population.
The health needs of individual patients coming through the consulting room door may not reflect
the wider health needs of the community. If people have a health problem that they believe
cannot be helped by the health service, then they will not attend. For example, many people with
angina or multiple sclerosis are not known to either their local general practitioner or to a
hospital specialist. Other groups of patients who may need health care but do not demand it
include homeless people and people with chronic mental illness.
Distinguishing between individual needs and the wider needs of the community is important in
the planning and provision of local health services. If these needs are ignored then there is a
danger of a top-down approach to providing health services, which relies too heavily on what a
few people perceive to be the needs of the population rather than what they actually are.
Summary points
   Health needs assessment is the systematic approach to ensuring that the health service
      uses its resources to improve the health of the population in the most efficient way
   It involves epidemiological, qualitative, and comparative methods to describe health
      problems of a population; identify inequalities in health and access to services; and
      determine priorities for the most effective use of resources
   Health needs are those that can benefit from health care or from wider social and
      environmental changes
   Successful health needs assessments require a practical understanding of what is
      involved, the time and resources necessary to undertake assessments, and sufficient
      integration of the results into planning and commissioning of local services
Importance of needs assessment


                                               11
The costs of health care are rising. Over the past 30 years expenditure on health care has risen
much faster than the cost increases reported in other sectors of the economy, and health care is
now one of the largest sectors in most developed countries. Medical advances and demographic
changes will continue the upward pressure on costs.
At the same time the resources available for health care are limited. Many people have
inequitable access to adequate health care, and many governments are unable to provide such
care universally. In addition there is a large variation in availability and use of health care by
geographical area and point of provision. Availability tends to be inversely related to the need
of the population served.
Another force for change is consumerism. The expectations of members of the public have led
to greater concerns about the quality of the services they receive—from access and equity to
appropriateness and effectiveness.
These factors have triggered reforms of health services in both developed and developing
countries. In Britain these reforms resulted in the separation of the responsibility for financing
health care from its provision and in the establishment of a purchasing role for health authorities
and general practitioners. Health authorities had greater opportunities to try to tailor local
services to their own populations, and the 1990 National Health Service Act required health
authorities to assess health needs of their populations and to use these assessments to set
priorities to improve the health of their local population. This has been reinforced by more recent
work on inequalities in health, suggesting that health authorities should undertake “equity
audits” to determine if healthcare resources are being used in accordance with need.
At a primary care level, through fundholding, locality commissioning, and total purchasing
projects, general practitioners have become more central to strategic planning and development
of health services. With this increased commissioning power has come the increased expectation
from patients and politicians that decision making would reflect local and national priorities,
promoting effective and equitable care on the basis of need. The Labour government has
committed itself to ensuring access to treatment according to “need and need alone,” and the
key functions of primary care groups will be to plan, commission, and monitor local health
services to meet identified local needs.
Needs
Doctors, sociologists, philosophers, and economists all have different views of what needs are.
In recognition of the scarcity of resources available to meet these needs, health needs are often
differentiated as needs, demands, and supply as shown in Figure 2.




                                               12
Figure 22: Health needs
Different aspects of needs
Need in health care is commonly defined as the capacity to benefit. If health needs are to be
identified then an effective intervention should be available to meet these needs and improve
health. There will be no benefit from an intervention that is not effective or if there are no
resources available.
Demand is what patients ask for; it is the needs that most doctors encounter. General
practitioners have a key role as gatekeepers in controlling this demand, and waiting lists become
a surrogate marker and an influence on this demand. Demand from patients for a service can
depend on the characteristics of the patient or on the media’s interest in the service. Demand
can also be induced by supply: geographical variation in hospital admission rates is explained
more by the supply of hospital beds than by indicators of mortality; referral rates of general
                                              13
  practitioners owe more to the characteristics of individual doctors than to the health of their
  populations.
  Supply is the health care provided. This will depend on the interests of health professionals, the
  priorities of politicians, and the amount of money available. National health technology
  assessment programmes have developed in recognition of the importance of assessing the supply
  of new services and treatments before their widespread introduction.

  Need, demand, and supply overlap, and this relation is important to consider when assessing
  health needs as shown in Figure 3.




  Figure 23: Relation between need, supply, and demand—central area shows ideal relation.
  Modified from Stevens and Raferty.
  Health needs incorporate the wider social and environmental determinants of health, such as
  deprivation, housing, diet, education, employment. This wider definition allows us to look
  beyond the confines of the medical model based on health services, to the wider influences on
  health (box). Health needs of a population will be constantly changing, and many will not be
  amenable to medical intervention.

For individual practices and health professionals, health needs assessment provides the
opportunity for:

      Describing the patterns of disease in the local population and the differences from
       district, regional, or national disease patterns;
      Learning more about the needs and priorities of their patients and the local population;
      Highlighting the areas of unmet need and providing a clear set of objectives to work
       towards to meet these needs;
      Deciding rationally how to use resources to improve their local population’s health in the
       most effective and efficient way;
      Influencing policy, interagency collaboration, or research and development priorities.



                                                14
     1.4.3 Communication skills in health education and promotion
  Communication is an essential part of human life; all meaningful social interaction can be
  labelled ‘communication’. Without communication an individual could never become a fully
  functioning human being. Reading, writing, listening, speaking, viewing and creating images
  are all acts of communication. There are also many more subtle communication activities that
  may be conscious or unconscious. These include expression, gesture and ‘body language’.
  Through communication people transfer facts, ideas, emotions, knowledge, attitudes and skills
  to make informed decisions about their health. In this study session you will learn the basic
  concepts, levels, roles, principles and types of communication used in health education and
  health promotion.
  Concepts of communication
  Different writers define communication in different ways although the central concept remains
  the same. The word communication is derived from the Latin word ‘communis’ which means
  to form a common ground of understanding, to share information, ideas or attitudes and to impart
  or transmit information. The common feature of these definitions is the transmission or
  exchange of information. Communication implies the sharing of meaning among those who are
  communicating. To engage in communication is therefore to engage in the process by which
  two or more people exchange ideas, facts, feelings or impressions, so that each gains a common
  or mutual understanding of the meaning and use of a message.
  Health communication
  Health communication is the art and technique of informing, influencing and motivating
  individuals or larger audiences about important health issues based on scientific and ethical
  considerations. It includes the study and use of communication strategies to inform and
  influence individual and community decisions that enhance health. Health communication is
  recognised as a necessary part of efforts to improve personal and public health. In other words,
  health communication encompasses the study and use of communication strategies to inform
  and influence individual and community knowledge, attitudes and practices (KAP) with regard
  to health and healthcare.

Health communication:

     initiates action
     makes needs known
     exchanges knowledge, attitudes and practices
     helps people understand issues and may change their health beliefs
     establishes and maintains relationships with health providers.
  Objectives of health communication
  In any type of communication, whether you are writing or speaking, trying to persuade, inform
  or educate, there are several general objectives. These include being understood, being accepted,
  and influencing an action such as a change of behaviour.

                                                15
Health communication contributes to better health outcomes for individuals and for the whole
community. It raises awareness of health risks and solutions, and provides the motivation and
skills needed to reduce these risks. It can affect or reinforce good health practices and attitudes,
giving people the information they need to make complex choices, such as selecting health
plans, care providers and treatments. Health communication also encourages social norms that
benefit health and improve quality of life.
Health communication is useful in helping individuals to find support from other people in
similar situations. Most importantly health communication can increase appropriate demand for
and use of health services. For the community, health communication can be used to influence
the public agenda, advocate for policies and programmes, and promote positive change. At the
same time it can help improve the delivery of public health and healthcare services.
Health communication can be both complex and subtle and different people may focus on
different areas. For example one person might generate action through helping people to
understand health-related issues, and another by helping them express their needs. Both of these
roles will help people to think that bringing about change is a good idea.
The role of health communication in health education and promotion
   Increases knowledge and awareness of a health issue, problem, or its solution
   Influences perceptions, beliefs, attitudes and social norms about health
   Generates effective action
   Demonstrates or illustrates health related skills
   Shows the benefit of behaviour change
   Increases appropriate use and demand for health services
   Reinforces knowledge, attitudes and behaviour
   Refutes myths and misconceptions
   Advocates for a health issue or a population group.
Levels of health communication
The more levels a communication programme can influence, the greater the likelihood of
creating and sustaining the desired change. This section outlines the different levels at which
health communication can take place.
Individuals
The individual is the most fundamental target for health-related change, since it is individual
behaviours that affect health status. Communication can affect an individual’s awareness,
knowledge, attitudes, self-efficacy, and skills for behaviour change. For example, counselling
on sexual risk reduction as well as HIV testing is an effective way to change behaviour and
protect health.
Social networks
An individual’s relationships and the groups (including family), to which they belong can have
a significant impact on his or her health. Health communication programmes can work to shape
the information a group receives and may attempt to change communication patterns within the
group. Opinion leaders within a network are often a point of entry for health programmes such
                                               16
as family-based HIV counselling and testing, or peer education. Targeting health
communication at social networks may result in a diffusion of innovations and network-based
health strategies. It can also provide opportunities for voluntary counselling and health tests for
all network members.
Organisations
Organisations include formal groups with a defined structure such as associations, clubs,
worksites or schools. Organisations can disseminate health messages to their members, provide
support for individuals and make policy changes that enable individual change. Examples
include institution-based health programmes providing services such as voluntary counselling
and health testing, or antenatal and child health services. These are often available within
workplaces, schools and other institutional settings.
Communities
The collective wellbeing of communities can be fostered by creating structures and policies that
support healthy lifestyles and reduce or eliminate hazards in social and physical environments.
Community-level initiatives are planned and led by organisations and institutions that can
influence health such as schools, worksites, healthcare settings, community groups and
government agencies.
Society
Society as a whole has many influences on individual and community behaviour, including
norms and values, attitudes and opinions, and laws and policies. Society also creates a physical,
economic and cultural environment.
Communicating at the society level can include using the mass media and other types of social
mobilisation. For example, HIV or TB educational programmes can be achieved through school,
church and workplace education programmes.
Types of communication
One-way communication
If the flow of information from the sender to the receiver is one-way the communication is
dominated by the sender’s knowledge and information is poured out towards the receiver. This
model does not consider feedback and interaction with the sender. A familiar example of this
model is the lecture method used in a classroom, where the teacher stands at the front of the
class and lectures on a subject without any interaction or activities. Unless mechanisms are put
in place to get feedback from the audience, many mass media communication methods are one-
way.




Figure 24: One-way communication.
                                               17
One-way communication isn’t in itself wrong and there times when it is very useful — as Table
6 illustrates. Think of a situation when one-way communication is used effectively.
Table 8: Advantages and disadvantages of one-way communication

 Advantages                            Disadvantages
 ● Faster                              ● Little audience participation
 ● Orderly                             ● No feedback
 ● Learning of facts is                ● Does not influence
 authoritative                         behaviour

Two-way communication
In this model the information flows from the sender to the receiver and back from receiver to
the sender again in the other direction. Two-way communication is reciprocal, the communicant
(receiver) becomes the communicator (sender) and the communicator (sender) in turn becomes
a communicant (receiver). Most ordinary conversations are along the lines of this model (Figure
5). Two-way communication is usually more appropriate for problem-solving situations.




Figure 25: Two-way communication


Table 9: Advantages and disadvantages of two-way communication.

 Advantages                            Disadvantages
 ● More audience participation         ● Slower, takes more time
 ● Learning is more democratic
 ● Open to feedback
 ● May influence behaviour
 change

Key terms for two-way communication
  Sender: the originator of each message — this could be an individual, group or
     organisation.
  Message: the idea being communicated.
  Channel: the means by which a message travels from sender to receiver.
  Receiver: the person for whom the communication is intended.
  Effect: the change in the receiver’s knowledge, attitude or practice.


                                             18
   Feedback: telling what they have done well or how to improve. Two-way feedback
       means that members of the community can tell you what you communicated well and
       what didn’t work so well.
Health Communication
It is defined as the study and use of communication strategies to inform and influence individual
and community decisions that enhance health.
Health communication includes verbal and written strategies to influence and empower
individuals, populations, and communities to make healthier choices. Health communication
often integrates components of multiple theories and models to promote positive changes in
attitudes and behaviors. Health communication is related to social marketing, which involves
the development of activities and interventions designed to positively change behaviors.
Effective health communication and social marketing strategies include the following
components:
   Use of research-based strategies to shape materials and products and to select the
       channels that deliver them to the intended audience.
   Understanding of conventional wisdom, concepts, language, and priorities for different
       cultures and settings.
   Consideration of health literacy, internet access, media exposure, and cultural
       competency of target populations.
   Development of materials such as brochures, billboards, newspaper articles, television
       broadcasts, radio commercials, public service announcements, newsletters, pamphlets,
       videos, digital tools, case studies, group discussions, health fairs, field trips, and
       workbooks among others media outlets.
Using a variety of communication channels can allow health messages to shape mass media or
interpersonal, small group, or community level campaigns. Health communication strategies
aim to change people's knowledge, attitudes, and/or behaviors; for example:
   Increase risk perception
   Reinforce positive behaviors
   Influence social norms
   Increase availability of support and needed services
   Empower individuals to change or improve their health conditions
Examples of media strategies to convey health messages include the following components:
   Radio
   Television
   Newspaper
   Flyers
   Brochures
   Internet
   Social media tools (i.e., Twitter, Facebook, and YouTube)

                                              19
Communication methods
Communication of health information is most effective when a variety of methods, approaches
and materials are used. Broadly speaking, there are three main approaches:
Person-to-person contact
Captive audiences may be found at clinics, feeding centres, food-distribution centres, water-
collection points and so on, where health workers and trained volunteers will be able to give
advice. In nonemergency periods, health clinics, schools and workplaces may provide similar
audiences. Meetings may be called for specific groups, or selected individuals may be brought
together for focus group discussions on specific topics, and individual families may also be
visited. The influence of existing local groups or social organizations can be very useful in
increasing the impact of the information.
This direct approach, particularly if it involves some interaction between health workers and
individuals, is most effective in tackling specific issues and encouraging particular changes in
behaviour, and in checking that messages are seen as relevant and useful by the people
concerned.
Activities suitable for person-to-person exchanges or for small groups include the discussion of
personal feelings and experiences, demonstrations, story-telling, role-playing, case studies and
educational games (particularly in nonemergency situations).
Teaching aids
Suitable teaching aids include printed materials, posters, films, slides, videos, murals, flannel
graphs and flip charts. These are useful for transmitting information and as support to the spoken
word, but must be reinforced by interaction and personal contact with members of the target
audience.
Using mass communication
Radio, audiocassettes, television, video, newspapers, placards, plays, puppet shows and
megaphones are effective means of communicating information quickly to a large number of
people and creating awareness of a problem or idea. The relevance and impact of messages, and
the effectiveness with which they are communicated, need to be evaluated by discussion with a
sample of people.
Following a disaster, mass media may be unavailable or at least severely disrupted. However,
radios may be available, and in long-term emergency settlements it may be possible to produce
a camp newspaper and to make arrangements with a nearby radio station to broadcast regular
programmes on health issues.
Further reading: https://www.ruralhealthinfo.org/toolkits/health-promotion/2/strategies/health-
communication
Health Education
Health education is one strategy for implementing health promotion and disease prevention
programs. Health education provides learning experiences on health topics. Health education
strategies are tailored for their target population. Health education presents information to target

                                               20
populations on particular health topics, including the health benefits/threats they face, and
provides tools to build capacity and support behavior change in an appropriate setting.
Examples of health education activities include:
   Lectures
   Courses
   Seminars
   Webinars
   Workshops
   Classes
Characteristics of health education strategies include:
   Participation of the target population.
   Completion of a community needs assessment to identify community capacity, resources,
     priorities, and needs.
   Planned learning activities that increase participants' knowledge and skills.
   Implementation of programs with integrated, well-planned curricula and materials that
     take place in a setting convenient for participants.
   Presentation of information with audiovisual and computer based supports such as slides
     and projectors, videos, books, CDs, posters, pictures, websites, or software programs.
   Ensuring proficiency of program staff, through training, to maintain fidelity to the
     program model.(https://www.ruralhealthinfo.org/toolkits/health-
     promotion/2/strategies/health-education)
Health Promotion
Health promotion is the process of improving and protecting the health of the public, including
individuals, populations, and communities. Health promotion can be achieved through planned
activities and programs that are designed to improve population health outcomes. Health
promotion programs can empower individuals to make healthier choices and reduce their risk
of disease and disability. At the population level, they can eliminate health disparities, improve
quality of life, and improve the availability of healthcare and related services.
Health promotion programs can be implemented in varied settings, including rural communities.
Rural residents can benefit from health promotion and disease prevention programs scaled for
use in rural communities, which have unique implementation considerations.
   1.4.4 Recording and Presentation assessment reports

Contents of an assessment report
In order to be as relevant as possible, the assessment report should contain the following
elements:
  1. The aim of the assessment
  2. The candidate’s professional experience
  3. The results of the assessment test
  4. The explanation of the test’s results that has been delivered by the candidate
                                              21
   5. The candidate’s possible disagreement with this or that part of the test results or
      interpretation
   6. The possible development actions in relation to the candidate’s (present of future)
      professional occupation

                                80      1.5 Learning Activities
     1.5.1 Practical activity
  Shellemiah is a Health Extension Practitioner in the village of Kisumu. He planned to teach his
  community about environmental sanitation and the benefits of latrine construction. Note down
  which forms of health communication a Health Extension Practitioner like he might want to use
  to teach the community about the issue of building and using latrines.
     1.5.2 Self-Assessment Questions
1. One of the services that Health Extension Practitioners are currently delivering is about
    HIV/AIDS and TB. Health communication is vital for delivering this service effectively. If
    you were conducting a health education programme on HIV/AIDS for young people, list the
    communication objectives you would want to achieve and justify.
2. Discuss some of the differences between one-way communication and two-way
    communication.
3. Give some examples of how health communication can help a. individuals, and b.
    communities.
     1.5.3 Answers to Self-Assessment questions
1) One of the services that Health Extension Practitioners are currently delivering is about
    HIV/AIDS and TB. Health communication is vital for delivering this service effectively. If
    you were conducting a health education programme on HIV/AIDS for young people, list the
    communication objectives you would want to achieve and justify.
     To create understanding on HIV/AIDS in the minds of young people
     To help young people so that they can accept the message delivered
     To get the young people to act on the required behaviour
  Justification:
     In any type of communication, whether you are writing or speaking, trying to persuade,
        inform, explain, convince or educate the general objectives would be first to create an
        understanding of HIV/AIDS in the minds of young people, second help them to accept
        the message delivered, and finally to influence the young people to change their
        behaviour.
2) Discuss some of the differences between one-way communication and two-way
    communication.
     In one-way communication the flow of information is from the sender to the receiver.
        The communication is dominated by the sender’s knowledge and learning is
        authoritative. This model does not consider feedback and interaction with the sender.
     During two-way communication information flows from the sender to the receiver and
        back again. This model is reciprocal and roles are interchanged. Two-way
                                               22
       communication is more appropriate in problem-solving situations and there is more
       participation and feedback, learning is democratic and it can more easily influence
       behaviour change. However, this type of communication takes more time.

3) Give some examples of how health communication can help a. individuals, and b.
   communities.
    For individuals, health communication:
          o Contributes to better health outcomes
          o Raises awareness of health risks and solutions
          o Provides the motivation and skills needed to reduce these risks
          o Affects or reinforces good health practices and attitudes, and gives people the
             information they need to make complex choices, such as selecting health plans, care
             providers and treatments
          o Helps individuals to find support from other people in similar situations.
    For the community, health communication:
          o Encourages social norms that benefit health and improve quality of life
          o Can increase appropriate demand for and appropriate use of health services
          o Can be used to influence the public agenda, advocate for policies and programmes
             and promote positive changes in socio-economic and physical environments
          o Can help improve the delivery of public health and healthcare services.

                    81     1.6 Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials
The following resources are provided:
    Teaching charts                Sound system                Weighing scales/materials
    Stationery                     Recording                   Cleaning materials
    Computer – internet,            materials/computers         Bronchures
    Pamphlets                      VCD/DVDs -                  Models
    Posters /flip-charts            audio,videos


                                     82     1.7 References
  Hartwig, K., Calleson, D., and Williams, M. (2006). Unit 1, section 1.1: Definitions, rationale
  and key principles in CBPR. In Developing and sustaining community-based participatory
  research partnerships: A skill-building curriculum. Retrieved from
  https://depts.washington.edu/ccph/cbpr/u1/u11.php
  Health Research & Educational Trust. (2016, July). Applying research principles to the
  community health needs assessment process. Chicago, IL: Health Research & Educational
  Trust. Accessed at https://www.aha.org/ahahret-guides/2016-07-15-applying-research-
  principles-community-health-needs-assessment-process




                                               23
83      2.1 Learning Outcomes 2: Develop objectives for health education and promotion
                       84     2.2 Introduction to the learning outcome
This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to conduct dietary surveys.
It comprises principles of health promotion, developing objectives of health
promotion/education, learning activities, self-assessment questions and answers, learning
activities, tools, equipment, supplies and materials and references.
                              85       2.3. Performance Standard
  1.3.1 Broad objective is drawn and documented as per WHO standards and work place
          policy
  1.3.2 Specific objectives are drawn and documented as per WHO standards and work place
          policy
                                 86       2.4 Information Sheet
    2.4.1 Principles of health promotion
The Five Principles
  1. A Broad and Positive Health Concept:
Health should be considered broadly and not merely as the direct opposite of disease and death.
It should also Embrace Dimensions of a Good Life and The Significance of Social Relations.
Underlying this principle is the fundamental assumption that humans exist within, and are
influenced by, their cultural, economic and social contexts. Contemporary health problems are
therefore embedded in the societal structures that surround us. This means that lifestyle and its
health-related consequences cannot be treated independently of living conditions, and that a
given intervention must be directed towards both lifestyle and living conditions.
Conceptualization of the “positive” stems from the World Health Organization‘s (WHO) well-
recognized definition of health from 1947: “Health is a state of complete physical, social and
mental wellbeing, and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity.” This definition uses the
concept of wellbeing to indicate the positive aspects of health. It is important to note, however,
that WHO’s positive definition still includes absence of disease as one of the dimensions of
health. The positive definition is, in other words, more extensive than the negative, which merely
focuses on absence of diseases while still emphasizing the importance of avoiding illness.




                                               i
Figure 26: Four different health concepts.
Figure 6 summarizes the definition of “positive” and “broad”, with the horizontal axis
representing the difference between positive and negative and the vertical axis representing
broad vs. narrow. The two concepts can be combined in four different ways, and the figure
therefore illustrates four different possible health concepts. The SHPR approach strives for the
health concept in square 4.
For example, a “positive” definition of health is applied in relation to food and meals when both
the aesthetic and nutritional aspects are addressed. Working with a “broad” concept may include
the availability of healthy food in the canteen, its cost, etc., as factors influencing attempts to
motivate individuals to eat healthier.
The “positive” approach to the health concept relates to the target group’s everyday language
and concepts. The terms “food” and “meals” generate more interest and engagement than do
“nutrition” and “diet”. Similarly, “games”, “play” and “dance” ensure greater motivation in the
target groups than do “physical activity” and “exercise”. Words and concepts are not neutral.
They can exclude and demotivate, or they can contribute to ownership and internalization. Thus,
a broad and positive concept of health is a determining element in attempts to engage and
motivate the target group.

                                               ii
  2. Participation and Involvement:
Participant involvement means ensuring the target group’s influence on projects and
interventions.
Participation and involvement is perhaps the most central of the health promotion principles, in
the sense that sustainable health promotion change can only take place if the target group has
the opportunity to develop ownership—and ownership and internalization are more likely to be
achieved if the target group is actively involved in the processes from the start.
The notion of participation and involvement can imply many different things among different
groups of healthcare professionals. This principle highlights the fact that development of
ownership is not necessarily determined by those who take the initiative. The interesting
developments may well first occur in the subsequent process, which leads to the point of
decision-making. A situation in which the healthcare professional initiates a process by
proposing a range of options, which are then developed and modified by the target group (e.g.,
patients), allows for greater involvement and strengthened ownership and empowerment. The
focus for developing ownership thus shifts from “initiative” and “bottom-up” to “dialogue” and
“co-creation”.
Hart notes that participation varies with individual characteristics and with context. People have
different kinds of motivation, capacity and potential for participation. It is therefore important
to maximise the opportunity for anyone to choose to participate at the highest level of their
ability.
There are often several stages involved in health-related projects. These stages further allow for
different forms of participation, and therefore a given health project often covers many different
forms of participation along the way. One question could be whether participation is voluntary,
and a second could relate to who takes an active lead in developing visions, ideas and proposals
for solutions.
A third question could focus on who should be involved in evaluating and, if necessary,
modifying the project for implementation in practice.
The principle of participation and involvement lies at the heart of diabetes prevention and
management, as it places the responsibility for facilitation on the healthcare professional, whose
task is to carry out an authentic dialogue with participants. During the course of this dialogue, it
is both the right and the duty of healthcare professionals to contribute their professional
knowledge, shape the dialogue and provide their own opinions. The dialogue must, however,
facilitate discussion about mutual expectations and active participation in the decision-making
process and ensure that it is mutually respected by the participant and healthcare professional.
This health promotion principle thus signals a potential alternative pathway between top-down
and bottom-up: dialogue and shared decision-making.

  3. Action and Action Competence:
Participants are given the opportunity to build skills to manage their own lives and change the
conditions and structures that influence their health.
In SHPR projects the concept of action competence is an overall goal. The concept derives from
an educational tradition based upon democracy, participation and a “hands-on” approach. This
stands in contrast to the more behavioral tradition, where the goal is to shape individual behavior
                                               iii
in a predetermined direction. A range of important health promotion concepts and approaches
incorporate, in one way or another, a resource-oriented perspective on health issues. Attention
has been directed towards, among other things, the five components described below.
Collectively, these components constitute the elements necessary to achieve a high level of what
we choose to call “action competence”.
   Insight: A broad, positive and action-oriented understanding of health, including insight
      into effects, causes and change strategies within the health area.
   Commitment: The desire and motivation to get involved in change processes with a view
      to promoting health.
   Vision: The ability to think creatively and have a vision, while allowing oneself to be
      inspired by other scenarios.
Action experience: Experience of undertaking change processes at both individual and collective
levels, including tackling and overcoming any barriers.
Critical sense: The ability to critically question information before adopting and drawing
reasonable conclusions.
Action experience—i.e. direct experience with changing one’s own life or surroundings—
constitutes a core element of “action competence”. A health promotion approach aimed at
building up action competence should therefore allow target groups to be involved with
authentic issues and challenges in order to utilize the learning potential found in real-life actions.
“Action competence” and “action” are inter-related, but should not be confused with each other.
For example, a group of children may possess the ability to act (action competence) in the
context of “body and motion”, but they also require an opportunity to apply the competence in
order to achieve a health-related change. In other words, there should be sufficient “room for
action”, such that the developed “action competence” can unfold. Accordingly, the healthcare
professional should provide space and foster the target group’s action competence. The concept
of action competence is closely inter-linked with a focus on settings and enables us to look at
how living conditions influence the ability to facilitate the components of action competence.




                                                iv
Figure 27: Four different categories of action.
  4. Health Should be Viewed from a “Settings Perspective”:
The structural and contextual settings in which people live, work and reside influence their
opportunities for healthy living
Health education cannot stand alone. Our lives and practices are influenced by the general
contextual framework in which we live. The underlying aim of always applying a settings
perspective is that a given intervention should encompass educational components as well as
the surrounding contextual framework within which education operates. Examples of
frameworks that should be included in health promotion could include environmental
restructuring in different settings, e.g., the school classroom, the preschool playground, the local
community centre, the physical and aesthetic environment of the clinic or the training rooms at
a municipal prevention centre.
It is possible to differentiate between two different varieties of the setting concept: (1) The
immediate context within which teaching or interventions occur (e.g. school, clinic, prevention
centre or workplace) and (2) the context within which participants’ daily lives unfold (e.g. home,
local area or sport clubs).


                                                v
Context, as applied in the first sense here concerns the physical, cultural and social frameworks
for conducting the intervention, whereas in the second sense it relates to the framework of a
daily life within which learning has to be applied. Here it is essential to focus on how physical
and social structural frameworks provide optimal synergy for health promotion issues. For
example, one could address how the immediate physical environment should be restructured to
allow greater opportunity and motivation to encourage participants to share their experiences.
For instance, does placing tables and chairs in a certain way have an effect on participation and
motivation? What environmental conditions assist in creating a pleasant atmosphere that has a
positive influence on motivation? How should the physical surroundings be organized to provide
optimal desire to exercise among people attending a municipal prevention centre?
  5. Equity in Health:
Not everyone has the same opportunities for leading healthy lives and changing practices. Health
promotion interventions must take these differences into account
This fifth principle, which aims to increase equity in health, is strictly speaking not a
methodological principle in the same sense as the four other principles. Rather, it is an
ideological perspective and a core value that all projects and all of the other four principles
should take into account.
There is no doubt that individuals from socially disadvantaged groups have a higher risk of
developing chronic conditions such as type 2 diabetes. It is also well known that practically all
methods used in diabetes management and prevention are less effective in individuals who have
access to fewer resources. In other words, there is a need to direct our attention towards those
who are most vulnerable and to try to understand how they can be motivated and involved as
effectively as other groups.
The fifth principle therefore focuses on developing and designing tailored methods and
approaches that fulfil the unmet needs of specific groups, such as residents in certain socially
disadvantaged areas, or vulnerable individuals with diabetes, e.g., from ethnic minority groups
or people with multi-morbidity. Moreover, this perspective also encompasses a leading global
challenge that demands immediate attention in areas of the world suffering from major health-
related social and financial burdens and, thus, requires effective interventions for both
prevention and patient education.
For diabetes prevention and management research, the setting approach provides a view of life
as it is actually lived, whether this relates to work, the family or the local community. It also
sharpens the focus on the complexity associated with health promotion initiatives. Whilst other
approaches to research seek to avoid or reduce the complexity of daily lives by choice of more
positivist study designs or analytical methods, the setting approach welcomes complexity and
seeks to actively handle it, describe it and intervene.
The underlying idea behind integrating this principle into an intervention paradigm with the four
other principles is that those who have limited resources and are marginalized and vulnerable
are expected to gain equally from a participant-oriented, skills-enhancing approach based on a
positive, broad concept of health. However, the principles should be modified and applied in
line with the actual resources available to specific target groups within their local contexts.



                                              vi
    2.4.2 Developing objectives of health promotion/education
The purpose of health promotion is to positively influence the health behavior of individuals and
communities as well as the living and working conditions that influence their health.
Objectives
An objective is a brief statement specifying the desired impact, or effect, of a health promotion
program (i.e., how much of what should happen to whom by when).
Characteristics of good program objectives include specificity, credibility, measurability,
continuity, compatibility and freedom from data constraints. The SMART acronym is an easy
way to remember the key features of well-crafted program objectives; that is, good objectives
are:
   S pecific (clear and precise)
   M easurable (amenable to evaluation)
   A ppropriate (i.e., realistic)
   R easonable (i.e., realistic)
   T imed (specific time frame provided for achievement of objective)
Short-term Objectives
Whether an objective is short or long-term is relative to the length of time needed to achieve the
program goal. As a general rule of thumb, the time frame for short-term objectives can be as
short as 2–3 months up to 2 years. The time frame for the achievement of long-term objectives
is usually 2–5 years.
Short-term objectives specify the short-term, or intermediate, results that need to occur to bring
about sustainable long-term changes. For example, changes in knowledge need to take place to
bring about longterm changes in health-related behaviours, or levels of support for a healthy
public policy among decision makers need to increase before the policy can be implemented.
Here are some examples of short-term objectives:
   At the end of the first year of the program, 90%of teen mothers in Natureville will know
       where to get birth control for free.
   By the end of the first year, 80% of participating parents will have increased access to
       affordable, nutritious food through participation the community kitchen program and the
       bulk-buying club.
Long-term Objectives
Long-term objectives specify the outcomes or changes needed to achieve program goals, such
as the reduction in the incidence of a health problem, or changes in health status resulting from
the implementation of a healthy public policy or environmental supports.
Here are some examples of long-term program objectives:
   By the end of the third year, the incidence of teen pregnancies in Natureville will decline
       by 50%.
   To reduce the incidence of social and developmental problems associated with poor child
       nutrition in innercity by 2002.
Importance of developing objectives
It is essential that objectives created for your health promotion project:
   are specific/non-ambiguous
                                              vii
    are realistic.
  As stated above, the objectives set out the assumptions and relationships you believe exist
  between what you want to happen and how you plan to make it happen.
                               87      2.5 Learning Activities
     2.5.1 Practical activity

    2.5.2 Self-Assessment Questions
1. List the Five Principles of health promotion
   a. A Broad and Positive Health Concept
   b. Participation and Involvement
   c. Action and Action Competence
   d. Health Should be Viewed from a “Settings Perspective”
   e. Equity in Health
2. Write examples of short-term objectives:
    At the end of the first year of the program, 90%of teen mothers in Natureville will know
       where to get birth control for free.
    By the end of the first year, 80% of participating parents will have increased access to
       affordable, nutritious food through participation the community kitchen program and the
       bulk-buying club.
3. What are the key features of well-crafted program objectives?
    S pecific (clear and precise)
    M easurable (amenable to evaluation)
    A ppropriate (i.e., realistic)
    R easonable (i.e., realistic)
    T imed (specific time frame provided for achievement of objective)

2.5.2 Answers to Self-Assessment questions
  1). List the Five Principles of health promotion
    f. A Broad and Positive Health Concept
    g. Participation and Involvement
    h. Action and Action Competence
    i. Health Should be Viewed from a “Settings Perspective”
    j. Equity in Health
2) Write examples of short-term objectives:
     At the end of the first year of the program, 90%of teen mothers in Natureville will know
        where to get birth control for free.
     By the end of the first year, 80% of participating parents will have increased access to
        affordable, nutritious food through participation the community kitchen program and the
        bulk-buying club.
3) What are the key features of well-crafted program objectives?
     S pecific (clear and precise)
     M easurable (amenable to evaluation)
                                              viii
           A ppropriate (i.e., realistic)
           R easonable (i.e., realistic)
           T imed (specific time frame provided for achievement of objective)

                    88     2.6 Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials
The following resources are provided:
         Teaching charts               Sound system               Weighing scales/materials
         Stationery                    Recording                  Cleaning materials
         Computer – internet,           materials/computers        Bronchures
         Pamphlets                     VCD/DVDs -                 Models
         Posters /flip-charts           audio,videos


                                     89     2.7 References
  Hartwig, K., Calleson, D., and Williams, M. (2006). Unit 1, section 1.1: Definitions, rationale
  and key principles in CBPR. In Developing and sustaining community-based participatory
  research partnerships: A skill-building curriculum. Retrieved from
  https://depts.washington.edu/ccph/cbpr/u1/u11.php
  Health Research & Educational Trust. (2016, July). Applying research principles to the
  community health needs assessment process. Chicago, IL: Health Research & Educational
  Trust. Accessed at https://www.aha.org/ahahret-guides/2016-07-15-applying-research-
  principles-community-health-needs-assessment-process




                                 CHAPTER SEVEN
                 PROVISION OF PSYCHOSOCIAL HEALTH SUPPORT
  Unit of learning code HE/CU/TT/CC/07/6/A
  Related Unit of Competency in Occupational Standard Provide Psychosocial Health Support
     Services
Introduction to the unit of learning

This Unit describes the competencies required to provide psychosocial health support. It involves

                                                   ix
identifying and assessing patients for psychosocial healthcare, caring for patients with
psychosocial health needs, linking same patients to appropriate psychosocial healthcare,
following–up on psychosocial healthcare support and documenting psychosocial health support
services.
90        Summary of Learning Outcomes
     1 Identify and assess patients for psychosocial healthcare need
     2 Care for patients with psychosocial health needs
     3 Follow up on psychosocial healthcare support
     4 Document psychosocial healthcare support
      7.1 Learning Outcome 1:
Identify and assess patients for psychosocial healthcare need.
      Introduction to the learning outcome
This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to identify and assess
patients for psychosocial healthcare need. It includes Basic counselling skills, Identification of
psychosocial needy patients, Psychosocial health needs, Components of psychosocial healthcare
and Patient assessment of psychosocial needs.

      7.2 Performance Standard
1.1 Patient for psychosocial healthcare support is identified as per the WHO standards and
Psychosocial Healthcare Standards.
1.2 Rapport is created between the healthcare giver and the patient as per WHO and
Psychosocial Healthcare Standards.
1.3 Patient is assessed for psychosocial healthcare need as per WHO standards and work place
policy.
1.4 Nature and extent of psychosocial healthcare need is analysed in accordance with
Psychosocial Healthcare Standards and WHO standards.
      7.3 Information Sheet
  Definition of terms
  Human Psychology: The scientific study of behavior and mental processes.
  Human development: The scientific study of the changes that occur in people as they age from
  conception until death.



                                                 x
 Development: refers to systematic continuities and changes in the individual that occur between
 conception (when the father’s sperm penetrates the mother’s ovum, creating a new organism)
 and death.
 Counselling: refers to a form of confidential helping which values and seeks to elicit each
 client’s innate internal resources, coping abilities and strengths.

 Basic Human Psychology
 Human Psychology refers the scientific study of behavior and mental processes. Behavior
 includes all of our outward or overt actions and reactions, such as talking, facial expressions,
 and movement. The term mental processes refer to all the internal, covert activity of our minds,
 such as thinking, feeling, and remembering. Why “scientific”? To study behavior and mental
 processes in both animals and humans, researchers must observe them. Whenever a human being
 observes anyone or anything, there’s always a possibility that the observer will see only what
 he or she expects to see. Psychologists don’t want to let these possible biases cause them to
 make faulty observations. They want to be precise, and to measure as carefully as they can—so
 they use the scientific method to study psychology.
 The major goals of studying human psychology include:
a. Description human behavior
b. Explanation human behavior
c. Prediction human behavior and
d. Control human behavior
 Understanding behavior is dependent on the particular view point taken, in other words, how
 any behavior is interpreted will depend on the theory used to explain it.
 For example, a behaviorist (more on this in later pages) would conclude that, for example,
 smoking is encouraged by the approval of significant people in one’s life, and it persists because
 of this continuing approval (before it becomes an addiction ), whereas a Freudian might
 conclude that smoking is a behavior which points to the person having not coped adequately
 with a particular conflict early in life. The former concludes that behavior will be repeated when
 it is approved, whereas the latter places weight on experiences in early life as having influences
 on how the person behaves in later life.
 The five major perspectives are:
a. Biological Perspective: From this perspective psychologists primarily study the brain and
   nervous system with a view to understanding how these bodily structures influence behavior.
                                                 xi
   We act in the world using our bodies. By that I mean we move, walk, see, taste, hear, touch
   and smell with our sensory systems. We think and reason about the world using our senses,
   which are mediated through the body, through the nervous system and neuromuscular
   equipment. This means that psychology cannot be disentangled from biology. The study of
   the brain, nervous system and hormones helps with an understanding of how we learn about
   the world, what we want in and from the world, and why we act in the ways that we do. For
   example, we know that the sensory system (sight, hearing, touching, tasting, smelling) is the
   primary means by which we receive information about the world, from birth.
b. Behavioral perspective: This is the study of learning by observing the direct effects of
   external environmental stimuli on behavior and behavior change. It refers to the study of
   behavior change. It is based on the assumption that behavior change signifies that learning
   has taken place. Behaviorism’s greatest impact has been the development of therapies for
   fears and phobias, anxiety disorders, the management of unwanted or challenging behaviors
   and its contribution to Cognitive Behavioral Therapy.
c. Psychoanalytic perspective: The study of the influence of childhood experiences on current
   psychological or emotional states. Psychoanalysis was founded by Sigmund Freud a medical
   doctor) as a method of inquiry, a theory of mind and a mode of treatment for complex
   psychological problems.
d. Cognitive perspective: This is the study of cognition mental processes including memory,
   perception, information processing, psychophysiology, psychoneuroimmunology and social
   cognition. Cognitive psychology is concerned with thought processes. It is originally based
   on experimental studies of memory, perception and information processing.
e. Humanistic perspective: This is the subjective study of human experience. Humanistic
   psychologists are concerned with individual perceptions and interpretations which are
   influenced by social and cultural meanings and past experiences. Therefore individual
   perceptions may change over time and vary in different social and cultural settings. The main
   focus is the individual’s sense of self.
 Professionals in the field of psychology
 Psychology is a large field, and the many professionals working within it have different training,
 different focuses, and may have different goals from the typical psychologist.
 Psychologists undergo intense academic training, learning about many different areas of
 psychology before choosing a specialization.

                                                xii
    Clinical psychologists: aim to reduce psychological distress and enhance and promote
     psychological well being. They further deal with assessment and diagnosis of psychological
     disorders.
    Educational psychology: Educational psychology is the study of how humans learn in
     educational settings, the effectiveness of educational interventions, the psychology of
     teaching.
    Health psychologists: apply psychological research and methods to the strategic prevention
     and management of disease, the promotion and maintenance of health, the identification of
     psychological factors that contribute to physical illness, and the formulation of health policy.
    Counseling psychologists: apply psychology to working collaboratively with people across a
     diverse range of human problems. This includes helping people manage difficult life events
     such as bereavement, past and present relationships and mental health problems such as
     depression.
    Forensic psychologists: Forensic psychologists apply psychological principles to understand
     the behavior of judges, attorneys, courtroom juries, and others in the criminal justice system.
    Personality psychologists: These psychologists study people and the differences among them.
     The goal is to develop theories that explain the psychological processes of individuals, and to
     focus on individual differences
    Sports psychologists: This field studies the psychological aspects of sports behavior. The goal
     is to understand the psychological factors that influence performance in sports, including the
     role of exercise and team interactions.
    Biopsychology and neuroscience: This field examines the physiological bases of behavior in
     animals and humans by studying the functioning of different brain areas and the effects of
     hormones and neurotransmitters on behavior.
    Developmental psychology: Mainly focusing on the development of the human mind through
     the life span, developmental psychology seeks to understand how people come to perceive,
     understand, and act within the world and how these processes change as they age.
    Social psychology: Social psychology is the study of the nature and causes of human social
     behavior, with an emphasis on how people think towards each other and how they relate
     to each other.
    Basic Human development and Behavior


                                                 xiii
    Beginning to understanding how we come to be the people we are is a critical step in
    understanding ourselves as we are today, and who we may become as we grow older. From the
    moment of conception, each of us is headed down a pathway of change, influenced by our
    biology, environment, and social interactions, to a final destination that is the same for all of us.
    In development, by describing changes as “systematic,” we imply that they are orderly,
    patterned, and relatively enduring, so temporary mood swings and other transitory changes in
    our appearances, thoughts, and behaviours are therefore excluded.
    We are also interested in continuities in development, or ways in which we remain the same or
    continue to reflect our past.
    If development represents the continuities and changes an individual experiences from “womb
    to tomb,” developmental sciences refer to the study of these phenomena and is a
    multidisciplinary enterprise. Although developmental psychology is the largest of these
    disciplines, many biologists, sociologists, anthropologists, educators, physicians, and even
    historians share an interest in developmental continuity and change, and have contributed in
    important ways to our understanding of both human and animal development.
    Because the science of development is multidisciplinary, we use the term developmentalist to
    refer to any scholar—regardless of discipline—who seeks to understand the developmental
    process.
    The second critical developmental process is learning—the process through which our
    experiences produce relatively permanent changes in our feelings, thoughts, and behaviours.
    Let’s consider a very simple example. Although a certain degree of physical maturation is
    necessary before a primary school child can become reasonably proficient at dribbling a
    basketball, careful instruction and many, many hours of practice are essential if this child is ever
    to approximate the ball-handling skills of a professional basketball player. Many of our abilities
    and habits do not simply unfold as part of maturation; we often learn to feel, think, and behave
    in new ways from our observations of and interactions with parents, teachers, and other
    important people in our lives, as well as from events that we experience. This means that we
    change in response to our environments—particularly in response to the actions and reactions
    of the people around us.
    Basic Characteristics of Development
     Continual and Cumulative Process: Although no one can specify precisely what adulthood
      holds in store from even the most meticulous examination of a person’s childhood,

                                                   xiv
        developmentalists have learned that the first 12 years are extremely important for setting the
        stage for adolescence and adulthood. Who we are as adolescents and adults also depends on
        the experiences we have later in life. Obviously, you are not the same person you were at age
        10 or even at age 15. You have probably grown somewhat, acquired new academic skills, and
        developed very different interests and aspirations from those you had as a standard 5. And the
        path of such developmental change stretches ever onward, through middle age and beyond,
        culminating in the final change that occurs when we die. In sum, human development is best
        described as a continual and cumulative process.
       Holistic Process: humans are physical, cognitive, and social beings, and each of these
        components of self depends, in part, on changes taking place in other areas of development.
        When we say development is holistic, we mean that we develop physically, psychologically,
        emotionally, socially and cognitive.
       Historical/Cultural Context: Development is also influenced by societal changes: historical
        events such as wars, technological breakthroughs such as the development of the Internet, and
        social causes such as the gay and lesbian movement. Each generation develops in its own
        way, and each generation changes the world for succeeding generations. So we should not
        automatically assume that developmental patterns observed in North American or European
        children (the most heavily studied populations) are optimal, or even that they characterize
        persons developing in other eras or cultural settings.
    Domains of development
    There are four major domains of development. They include:
        Physical domain: This refers to the development of physical characteristics such as height,
         weight, scull formation, motor development
        Cognitive domain: This refers to the development of our mental processes such as
         information processing, thinking, language, reasoning, moral development
        Personality Domain: This refers to the development of our enduring patterns of behavior
         including our temperament
        Psycho-social Domain: This refers to the development of how we form relationships and
         our sense of being male or female.
    Lifespan stages of development
    Human beings go through 8 major stages of lifespan development. These stages include:


                                                    xv
  i.   Prenatal Development: This is the stage between conception and birth. This stage consists
       of three stages;
                    a. Geminal stage: Lasts for 2 weeks after fertilization of the ovum by the
                      sperm when a zygote is formed and the process of cell division begins as
                      the zygote moves to implant itself on the uterine wall.
                    b.Embryonic stage: Lasts upto 6 weeks after conception. The process of cell
                      division continues rapidly as the various organs of the human body begin to
                      form.
                    c. Fetal stage: This stage lasts between 6 weeks to birth (40 weeks). During
                      this stage, most of the body organs have been formed are continuing to form
                      and function.
ii.    Infancy and toddlerhood: The first year and a half to two years of life are ones of dramatic
       growth and change. A newborn, with many involuntary reflexes and a keen sense of
       hearing but poor vision, is transformed into a walking, talking toddler within a relatively
       short period of time. Caregivers similarly transform their roles from those who manage
       feeding and sleep schedules to constantly moving guides and safety inspectors for mobile,
       energetic children. Brain development happens at a remarkable rate, as does physical
       growth and language development.
iii.   Early Childhood stage: Early childhood is also referred to as the preschool years,
       consisting of the years that follow toddlerhood and precede formal schooling, roughly from
       around ages 2 to 5 or 6. As a preschooler, the child is busy learning language (with amazing
       growth in vocabulary), is gaining a sense of self and greater independence, and is beginning
       to learn the workings of the physical world. This knowledge does not come quickly,
       however, and preschoolers may initially have interesting conceptions of size, time, space
       and distance, such as demonstrating how long something will take by holding out their two
       index fingers several inches apart.
iv.    Middle Childhood stage: The ages of 6-11 comprise middle childhood and much of what
       children experience at this age is connected to their involvement in the early grades of
       school. Now the world becomes one of learning and testing new academic skills and
       assessing one’s abilities and accomplishments by making comparisons between self and
       others. Schools participate in this process by comparing students and making these
       comparisons public through team sports, test scores, and other forms of recognition. The

                                               xvi
      brain reaches its adult size around age seven, but it continues to develop. Growth rates slow
      down and children are able to refine their motor skills at this point in life. Children also
      begin to learn about social relationships beyond the family through interaction with friends
      and fellow students; same-sex friendships are particularly salient during this period.
v.    Adolescence stage: Adolescence is a period of dramatic physical change marked by an
      overall physical growth spurt and sexual maturation, known as puberty; timing may vary
      by gender, cohort, and culture. It is also a time of cognitive change as the adolescent begins
      to think of new possibilities and to consider abstract concepts such as love, fear, and
      freedom. Ironically, adolescents have a sense of invincibility that puts them at greater risk
      of dying from accidents or contracting sexually transmitted infections that can have
      lifelong consequences. Research on brain development helps us understand teen risk-
      taking and impulsive behavior. A major developmental task during adolescence involves
      establishing one’s own identity. Teens typically struggle to become more independent from
      their parents. Peers become more important, as teens strive for a sense of belonging and
      acceptance; mixed-sex peer groups become more common. New roles and responsibilities
      are explored, which may involve dating, driving, taking on a part-time job, and planning
      for future academics.
vi.   Young adulthood stage: Late teens, twenties, and thirties are often thought of as early
      adulthood (students who are in their mid to late 30s may love to hear that they are young
      adults!). It is a time when we are at our physiological peak but are most at risk for
      involvement in violent crimes and substance abuse. It is a time of focusing on the future
      and putting a lot of energy into making choices that will help one earn the status of a full
      adult in the eyes of others. Love and work are the primary concerns at this stage of life. In
      recent decades, it has been noted (in the U.S. and other developed countries) that young
      adults are taking longer to “grow up.” They are waiting longer to move out of their parents’
      homes, finish their formal education, take on work/careers, get married, and have children.
      One psychologist, Jeffrey Arnett, has proposed that there is a new stage of development
      after adolescence and before early adulthood, called “emerging adulthood,” from 18 to 25
      (or even 29) when individuals are still exploring their identities and don’t quite feel like
      adults yet. Cohort, culture, time in history, the economy, and socioeconomic status may be
      key factors in when youth take on adult roles.



                                               xvii
vii.    Middle adulthood stage: The late thirties (or age 40) through the mid-60s are referred to
        as middle adulthood. This is a period in which physiological aging that began earlier
        becomes more noticeable and a period at which many people are at their peak of
        productivity in love and work. It may be a period of gaining expertise in certain fields and
        being able to understand problems and find solutions with greater efficiency than before.
        It can also be a time of becoming more realistic about possibilities in life; of recognizing
        the difference between what is possible and what is likely. Referred to as the sandwich
        generation, middle-aged adults may be in the middle of taking care of their children and
        also taking care of their aging parents. While caring about others and the future, middle-
        aged adults may also be questioning their own mortality, goals, and commitments, though
        not necessarily experiencing a “mid-life crisis.”
viii.   Late adulthood stage: This period of the lifespan, late adulthood, has increased in the last
        100 years, particularly in industrialized countries, as average life expectancy has increased.
        Late adulthood covers a wide age range with a lot of variation, so it is helpful to divide it
        into categories such as the “young old” (65-74 years old), “old old” (75-84 years old), and
        “oldest old” (85+ years old). The young old are similar to middle-aged adults; possibly still
        working, married, relatively healthy, and active. The old old have some health problems
        and challenges with daily living activities; the oldest old are often frail and in need of long
        term care. However, many factors are involved and a better way to appreciate the diversity
        of older adults is to go beyond chronological age and examine whether a person is
        experiencing optimal aging (like the gentleman pictured in Figure 8 who is in very good
        health for his age and continues to have an active, stimulating life), normal aging (in which
        the changes are similar to most of those of the same age), or impaired aging (referring to
        someone who has more physical challenge and disease than others of the same age).


          VIDEO ALERT!
          https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLLTWYyyYlAAFlcYwnB8m8jrSrZv6QWp0
          R


   Basic Counselling Skills




                                                 xviii
Counsellors may help clients with specific problems in the present, but they may also
support clients with long-term problems stemming from the past too.
Rapport building is at the root of effective communication. Especially when providing
psychosocial support, knowing how to develop rapport is key to the success of the
therapeutic process.
When offering psychosocial support, counselling skills come into play as a way of the care
giver to create and maintain rapport with the client. Some of the counselling skills include:
Listening and attending: Active listening is a term commonly used in relation to
counselling. Several factors that are necessary for complete listening, and these include the
observation of clients’ non-verbal behaviour, as well as understanding verbal content and
meaning. It goes without saying that the ‘way’ something is said is just as important as the
actual words spoken. This last point is especially relevant in the counselling context, for
clients often have difficulty in finding exactly the right words to express the way they feel.
In these circumstances, accompanying non-verbal cues sometimes speak much more
eloquently than words. Listening and attending are, therefore, skills that always go together


                                         xix
        in counselling. This is because it is not possible for counsellors to give clients their full
        attention without actively listening to them.
        Paraphrasing: The word ‘paraphrasing’ refers to the rewording of the content of what
        clients say. Reflection and paraphrasing are very similar; the difference between them
        being that the former is generally used to describe a rewording of the emotional content,
        while the latter is mainly concerned with the factual.
        Summarising: The skill of summarising is used when a helper wishes to respond to a series
        of statements or, in the case of counselling, to a whole session. Clients often talk at random,
        and they are frequently side-tracked into other related (and sometimes unrelated) issues.
        This can make it difficult to monitor everything they say, and formulating an accurate
        summary also requires active listening and an ability to draw all the random threads
        together into a more coherent framework.
        Asking questions: One of the difficulties you may find in listening to others is that your
        curiosity is aroused, and you are tempted to ask questions in order to get the detail clear in
        your own head. Most of us probably ask too many questions in our communications with
        other people, and active listening is often diminished as a result. Questions can be
        especially problematic in counselling because counsellors sometimes ask questions in
        order to get the facts straight for themselves, rather than from a desire to understand the
        client’s subjective experience of things.
        Other skills include:
              Encouraging clients to be specific
              Reflecting their feelings
              Helping them to clarify their thoughts
              Encouraging them to focus on key issues
              Offering forms of challenge when needed


       VIDEO ALERT!
3 Quick Rapport Building Techniques: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FU4TL4-
Rpo8




  Principles of counselling
                                                    xx
    Several foundational principles are the underpinnings of best ethical practice and are viewed as
    central to the process of ethical decision making within the helping professions
    A description of each of the five foundational principles of counselling is as follows:
     Autonomy is the principle that addresses respect for independence, and self-determination.
      The essence of this principle is allowing an individual the freedom of choice and action. It
      addresses the responsibility of the counselor to encourage clients, when appropriate, to make
      their own decisions and to act on their own values
     Justice: Justice means not discriminating any clients. It means that psychologists should be
      in a position to execute reasonable judgment and take precautions to ensure that their potential
      biases do not lead to any unjust (discriminating) practices. An injustice occurs when some
      benefit to which a person is entitled is denied without good reason or when some burden is
      imposed unduly.
     Beneficence reflects the counselor’s responsibility to contribute to the welfare of the client.
      Simply stated, it means to do good, to be proactive, and also to prevent harm when possible.
      Beneficence can come in many forms, such as prevention and early intervention actions that
      contribute to the betterment of clients.
     Non-maleficence is the concept of not causing harm to others. Often explained as “above all,
      do no harm,” this principle is considered by some to be the most critical of all the principles,
      even though theoretically they are all of equal weight. This principle reflects both the idea of
      not inflicting intentional harm, and not engaging in actions that risk harming others. Weighing
      potential harm against potential benefits is important in a counselor’s efforts toward ensuring
      “no harm.”
     Fidelity involves the notions of loyalty, faithfulness, and honoring commitments. Clients must
      be able to trust the counselor and have faith in the therapeutic relationship if growth is to
      occur. Therefore, the counselor must take care not to threaten the therapeutic relationship or
      to leave obligations unfulfilled.
    Identifying patients in need of psycho-social support
    It is important for all community health care workers to understand mental illness and learn how
    to identify the signs and symptoms. Research shows that:
    Approximately 20% of adults in the U.S., or 40 3.8 million people, experience a mental illness
     each year according to the National Alliance on Mental Illness


                                                  xxi
    Nearly one out of every five youths from age 13 to 18 will experience a severe mental disorder
     during their lifetime
    Each year, serious mental illness costs $193.2 billion in lost earnings
    Those who live with a serious mental illness also face an increased risk of chronic health
     conditions
    Over one-third of students with a mental health condition dropout of high school
    More than 90% of those who die by suicide have symptoms of a mental health condition.
    1% of adults live with schizophrenia
    6% with bipolar disorder
    9% have experienced at least one major depressive episode
    Trying to tell the difference between expected behavior and signs of mental illness is not always
    easy, especially in people who are under stress. Although there is no easy test and each disorder
    has its own symptoms, there are some common signs of mental illness to help you identify those
    who may benefit from psychosocial health support.
    Anxiety and depression: We all feel stressed or sad from time to time. However, anxiety and
    depression can be a sign of mental health issues when it is constant and interferes with other
    activities. If you have noticed your client has lost interest, seems sad or irritable all the time, and
    lacks motivation and energy, they may be suffering from more than sadness. Symptoms of
    anxiety may include shortness of breath, headaches, diarrhea or a racing mind. Your client may
    not share these symptoms with you, but by watching their behavior and their ability to stay on
    track during a conversation, the symptoms may become evident.
    Extreme mood changes: We all experience times when moods change, but sudden and dramatic
    changes in mood, such as uncontrollable “highs,” feelings of euphoria, prolonged or strong
    feelings of anger or irritability may be symptoms of mental illness.
    Changes in sleeping habits or feeling constantly fatigued: To maintain optimal health, we need
    8 hours of sleep each night. When an individual experiences persistent changes in sleeping
    patterns, this might indicate a mental illness. Insomnia can be a sign of anxiety, depression or
    substance abuse. In some cases, your client may be sleeping 8 or more hours and still feel
    fatigued on a consistent basis. This is another indication they may be struggling with a mental
    health condition.




                                                    xxii
Weight or appetite changes: Some people eat more when they are under stress or feeling bad,
and others eat less. This effects weight gain or loss and is also a warning sign of a mental health
condition or eating disorder.
Inability to deal with daily activities: This may include avoiding friends and social activities,
changes in sex drive, or recent withdrawal and loss of Interest in activities your client previously
enjoyed. Students may demonstrate an unusual drop in function at school, such as quitting sports
or failing grades. Adults may demonstrate a similar drop in function at work, such as not meeting
deadlines and poor performance.
Heightened sensitivity: Demonstrating a heightened sensitivity to sights, sounds, smells or
touch, such as avoiding over-stimulating situations or jumping dramatically at loud noises, may
also indicate mental health conditions.
Feeling guilty or worthless: Some experiencing mental health conditions express feelings or
thoughts such as “I’m a failure,” “It’s my fault” or “I’m worthless.”
Difficulty relating to other people: Your client may express confused thinking or constant
problems concentrating, difficulty understanding or relating to people and difficulty perceiving
reality, including an inability to perceive changes in their own feelings that may appear as a lack
of insight
Substance abuse: If it appears your client is drinking an excessive amount of alcohol, relying
on alcohol each day, using other recreational or prescription drugs to cope with life or exhibiting
drug-seeking behavior, they may suffer from an addiction problem and an underlying mental
health condition for which they are attempting to self-medicate.
Multiple physical ailments without obvious causes: Vague physical complaints, such as
headaches, stomach aches and ongoing aches and pains without a current diagnosis explaining
the symptoms, is another sign of a mental health condition. In this case, it is important your
client is evaluated for an underlying medical condition which may not have been diagnosed.
Assessment of the patient for psychological health care needs
Psychological assessment contributes important information to the understanding of individual
characteristics and capabilities, through the collection, integration, and interpretation of
information about an individual. Such information is obtained through a variety of methods and
measures, with relevant sources determined by the specific purposes of the evaluation and these
methods and measures are known as the assessment tools.
Key factors that should be considered when selecting an assessment tool include:

                                              xxiii
    a    the purpose for which the tests are being used
    b    Users Knowledge of typical items, quantity and range of items
    c    relevance of the test items to the job criteria
    d    Potential acceptability to clients
    e    accuracy of the measures (including risks associated with unfair discrimination and test bias)
    f    costs of materials and other implementation costs
    g    suitability of automated reports available to audience
    Major assessment tools include:
1       Psychological test is an objective and standardized measure of an individual's mental and/or
        behavioral characteristics. Psychological tests include personality test (Rorschach inkblot test,
        Thematic Apperception Test (TAT), Sentence completion test, Create drawings (Draw a
        person test) or complete a story. Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory, Millon Clinical
        Multiaxial Inventory (MCMI ), The California Psychological Inventory (CPI) , Sixteen
        Personality Factor Questionnaire (or 16PF) , The Eyesenck Personality Inventory, Myer Briggs
        Type Indicator (MBTI),
        Intelligence   tests   (Stanford-Binet    Intelligence   Scales   and    Wechsler    intelligence
        scales(Wechsler intelligence scale for children and Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale)
        Neuropsychological testing: Luria- Nebraska battery, Halsted- Reitan battery Michigan
        neuropsychological battery, Shipley Institute of Living Scale, NIMHANS neuropsychological
        battery.
2       The Interview: The interview as a tool of psychological assessment typically involves more
        than talk. If the interview is conducted face-to-face, then the interviewer is probably taking
        note of not only the content of what is said but also the way it is being said. More specifically,
        the interviewer is taking note of both verbal and nonverbal behavior. Nonverbal behavior may
        include the interviewee’s “body language,” movements and facial expressions in response to
        the interviewer, the extent of eye contact, and apparent willingness to cooperate.
3       The Portfolio: Students and professionals in many different fields of endeavor ranging from
        art to architecture keep files of their work products. These work products—whether retained
        on paper, canvas, fi lm, video, audio, or some other medium—constitute what is called a
        portfolio.
4       Case History Data: Case history data refers to records, transcripts, and other accounts in
        written, pictorial, or other form that preserve archival information, official and informal

                                                     xxiv
     accounts, and other data and items relevant to an assessee. Case history data may include files
     or excerpts from files maintained at institutions and agencies such as schools, hospitals,
     employers, religious institutions, and criminal justice agencies.
5    Behavioral Observation: If you want to know how someone behaves in a particular situation,
     observe his or her behavior in that situation. Such “down-home” wisdom underlies at least one
     approach to evaluation. Behavioral observation, as it is employed by assessment professionals,
     may be defined as monitoring the actions of others or oneself by visual or electronic means
     while recording quantitative and/or qualitative information regarding the actions.
6    Role-Play Tests: Role play may be defined as acting an improvised or partially improvised
     part in a simulated situation. A role-play test is a tool of assessment wherein assessees are
     directed to act as if they were in a particular situation. Assessees may then be evaluated with
     regard to their expressed thoughts, behaviors, abilities, and other variables.
      Assessing patients involves the following components:
     General Observations: Appearance, Speech, Behavior, Cooperativeness
     Thinking: Thought Process, Thought Content, Perceptions
     Emotion: Mood, Affect,
     Cognition: Orientation/Attention, Memory, Insight, Judgment
Psychosocial Health Needs
    Psychosocial needs is a term used to represent patient and family's mental, social, cultural,
    spiritual, and developmental needs arising from emotional responses to their diagnosis, social
    and role limitations, loss of physical and/or mental abilities. These needs may include:
     Debilitating disease
     Stress
     Depression
     Anxiety
     Grief
     Burn - out
      Table 1.1 Psychosocial Needs and Formal Services to Address Them
      Psychosocial Need          Health Services
      Information       about      Provision of information, e.g., on illness, treatments, effects on
      illness,     treatments,      health, and psychosocial services, and help to patients/families in


                                                   xxv
health, and services            understanding and using the information
Help in coping with
                                   Peer support programs
emotions
accompanying illness               Counseling/psychotherapy to individuals or groups
and treatment
                                   Pharmacological management of mental symptoms

Help      in   managing        Comprehensive illness self-management/self-care programs
illness
Assistance             in
                               Behavioral/health promotion interventions, such as:
changing behaviors to
minimize impact of                  o Provider assessment/monitoring of health behaviors (e.g.,
disease                                smoking, exercise)

                                    o Brief physician counseling

                                       o Patient education, e.g., in cancer-related health risks
                                           and risk-reduction measures

Material and logistical            Provision of resources
resources,     such    as
transportation
Help      in   managing
                                   Family and caregiver education
disruptions in work,
school, and family life            Assistance   with    activities   of   daily living   (ADLs),
                                    instrumental ADLs, chores

                                   Legal protections and services, e.g., under the children’s Act

                                   Cognitive testing and educational assistance

Financial        advice
                                   Financial planning/counseling, including management of
and/or assistance
                                    day-to-day activities such as bill paying

                                   Insurance (e.g., health, disability) counseling

                                   Eligibility assessment/counseling for other benefits (e.g.,


                                              xxvi
                                     Supplemental Security Income, Social Security Disability
                                     Income)

                             Supplement financial grants


Components of psychosocial healthcare
Psychosocial health is the result of complex interaction between a person’s history and his or her
thoughts about and interpretations of the past and what the past means to
The major components of Psychosocial health are:
Mental health: The thinking you. This is the “thinking” or “rational” part of psychosocial health.
Mentally healthy people tend to respond to life’s challenges constructively. Irrational thinking
may indicate poor mental health.
Emotional Health: The feeling you. The “feeling” or subjective side of psychosocial health that
includes emotional reactions to life. Emotions are intensified feelings and complex patterns and
include: love, hate, frustration, anxiety, and joy.
Social health: Interactions with others. This is the aspect of psychosocial health that includes
interactions with others, ability to use social supports, and ability to adapt to various situations.
It also includes social bonds and social support.
Spiritual health: An inner quest for well-being. This refers to a belief in a unifying force that
gives purpose or meaning to life, a sense of belonging, a feeling of connection to other people, to
nature, or God or other higher power.




                                                xxvii
 Psychosocial health care may include the following aspects:
        Basic counseling
        Drug adherence
        Feeding
        Advise for medical checkup
        Accompanying for medical care
       7.1.4 Learning Activities
  7.1.4.1 Practical Activity
Task 1: Attend the nearest GBV center in your community and carry out a psychosocial
assessment of the health care workers in that community.
  7.1.4.2 Self-Assessment
You are provided with the following questions for self -assessment, attempt them and check your
responses

                                             xxviii
     1 What is human psychology?

     2 Who is a developmentalist?

     3 Which are the major components of psychosocial health?

     4 What are the 8 stages of lifespan development?

     5 Which personality tests can you use to assess a client for psychosocial needs?

            Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials
The following resources are provided:
     a     A counseling room with seats, a desk and tissues
     b Assessment documents
     c     Computers
     d Stationery
     e     Note book


         7.1.5 References
    Corey, G. (2012). Theory and Practice of Counseling,8th Edition: Cengage Learning, USA
    Myers, D. (2014). Psychology of Everyday Life. Worth Publisher, New York
    https://courses.lumenlearning.com/wm-lifespandevelopment/chapter/periods-of-human-
    development/
    https://www.counseling.org/docs/default-source/ethics/practioner-39-s-guide-to-ethical-
    decision-making.pdf
    https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK4017/table/a200147b7ttt00002/?report=objectonly
    https://journals.lww.com/cancernursingonline/Abstract/1997/10000/Intervening_with_the_psy
    chosocial_needs_of.6.aspx
    Responses to self - assessment questions
1    What is human psychology?

     Human Psychology refers the scientific study of behavior and mental processes.

2    Who is a developmentalist?



                                                 xxix
      It refers to any scholar—regardless of discipline—who seeks to understand the developmental
     process

3    Which are the major components of psychosocial health?

          Mental health

          Emotional Health

          Social health

          Spiritual health

4    What are the 8 stages of lifespan development?

          Prenatal development

          Infancy/toddlerhood

          Early childhood

          Middle childhood

          Adolescence

          Young adulthood

          Middle adulthood

          Late adulthood

5    Which personality tests can you use to assess a client for psychosocial needs?

     Rorschach inkblot test, Thematic Apperception Test (TAT), Sentence completion test, Create
     drawings (Draw a person test) or complete a story. Minnesota Multiphasic Personality
     Inventory, Millon Clinical Multiaxial Inventory (MCMI ), The California Psychological
     Inventory (CPI) , Sixteen Personality Factor Questionnaire (or 16PF) , The Eyesenck
     Personality Inventory, Myer Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI),

         7.2 Learning Outcome 2:

    Care for patients with psychosocial health needs




                                                xxx
     7.2.1 Introduction to the learning outcome
This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to care for patients with
psychosocial health need. It includes prioritizing psychological needs, standards for
psychosocial health care services, psychosocial healthcare team, collaborative approaches,
effective communication in psychosocial health care, critical thinking and Care for the care giver

     7.2.2 Performance Standard
  2.1 Psychosocial health needs are prioritised as per the assessment report analysis.
  2.2 Specific psychosocial health care is given as per Standards for Psychosocial Healthcare and
  WHO standards.
  2.3 Requirements for offering psychosocial health care support are identified and gathered as
  per WHO standards and work place policy.
  2.4 Collaborative care between psychosocial and biomedical care is provided as per work policy,
  Standards for Psychosocial Healthcare and WHO standards
  2.5 Patient is linked to psychosocial services as per work policy, Standards for Psychosocial
  Healthcare and WHO standards
  7.2.3 Information Sheet
  Definition of terms
  Mental health: This refers to our emotional, psychological, and social well-being. It affects how
  we think, feel, and act. It also helps determine how we handle stress, relate to others, and make
  choices.
  Case Management: This is a collaborative process of assessment, planning, facilitation, care
  coordination, evaluation and advocacy for options and services to meet an individual’s and
  family’s comprehensive health needs through communication and available resources to
  promote patient safety, quality of care, and cost effective outcomes.
  Screening: This is the preliminary assessment of a client to ascertain his or her fitness for health
  related or psychiatric therapy in general, a particular treatment strategy,
  Prioritizing psychological needs
  The World Health Organization (WHO) embraces a definition of health as “physical, mental,
  and social well-being”. Of these elements, mental well-being historically has been
  misunderstood and often forgotten. WHO has spent the last five years actively addressing the
  barriers that prevent access to mental health care and campaigning for the full incorporation of
  mental health in worldwide public health.
                                                xxxi
Mental health is described by WHO as:
“… a state of well-being in which the individual realizes his or her own abilities, can cope with
the normal stresses of life, can work productively and fruitfully, and is able to make a
contribution to his or her community.”
In this positive sense mental health is the foundation for well-being and effective functioning
for an individual and for a community. This core concept of mental health is consistent with its
wide and varied interpretation across cultures.
The Theory of Basic Psychological Needs postulates that human beings have three inborn basic
needs: autonomy, competence, and relatedness.
   The need for autonomy is the freedom to determine, plan and implement one’s behaviours
    and living- as different from being independent. The system of selfhood that is related with
    the system of autonomy, and social supports are the primary determinants of how to cope
    with stress
   Competence is one’s belief in his or her ability to cope with a certain state. People need a
    certain amount of effectiveness and confidence in their activities. Negative feedbacks given
    by others will reduce the feeling of competence and may discourage individuals and cause
    them not to take part in activities.
   Relatedness is the need for belonging It enables individuals to interact with a warm and
    friendly atmosphere and with people providing such an environment, and to experience the
    sense of belonging and relatedness. An individual lives the self in such an environment. It is
    thought that environments supporting autonomy require more activeness and more
    participation, which facilitate individuals’ development. People need to contact and interact
    with others and to feel that the relations exist and will continue to exist.
Psychological health depends on satisfying the three needs. All of the needs contribute to
effective functioning and to psychological health. None of them could be disclaimed. Besides,
needs are complementary to each other rather than in conflict. The three basic needs are the
unchanging universal tendencies which are inherently available in humans and which therefore
do not differ from culture to culture. Meeting the needs, which is a nutrient to human soul, feeds
the psychological well being while failure to meet the needs or hindering it, that is to say, hunger
due to the lack of food, may cause ill being.
Standards for psychosocial health care services


                                                xxxii
  Many different providers of health services—some in oncology, some delivering health care for
  other complex health conditions—recognize that psychosocial problems can have both direct
  and indirect effects on health and have developed interventions to address them. Some of these
  interventions are derived from theoretical or conceptual frameworks; some are based on research
  findings; and some have undergone empirical testing.
  The best have all three characteristics. When viewed together, these interventions evidence
  common elements that point to a model for the effective delivery of psychosocial health services.
  The components of this model include;
a. identifying patients with psychosocial health needs that are likely to affect their health or health
   care, and developing with patients appropriate plans for
b. linking patients to appropriate psychosocial health services,
c. supporting patients in managing their illness,
d. coordinating psychosocial with biomedical health care, and
e. following up on care delivery to monitor the effectiveness of services and determine whether
   any changes are needed.
  Effective patient–provider communication is central to all of these components. A combination
  of several activities rather than any single activity by itself (e.g., screening, case management,
  illness self-management) is needed to deliver appropriate psychosocial health care effectively
  to individuals with complex health conditions. This conclusion also is supported by the findings
  of several systematic reviews of psychosocial care. For example, not surprisingly, screening by
  itself is less effective than screening with follow-up. The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force,
  for instance, recommends screening for depression in adults in clinical practices only when
  practices have systems in place to ensure effective follow-up treatment and ongoing monitoring.
  This recommendation reflects research finding that only small benefits result from screening by
  itself, but larger benefits when screening is accompanied by effective follow-up.




                                                 xxxiii
  Figure 1.1 Model for the delivery of psychosocial health services.
Collaborative approaches
  This is also known as care coordination. Care coordination is the deliberate organization of
  patient care activities between two or more participants (including the patient) involved in a
  patient’s care to facilitate the appropriate delivery of health care services. Organizing care
  involves the marshalling of personnel and other resources needed to carry out all required patient
  care activities, and is often managed by the exchange of information among participants
  responsible for different aspects of care. Care coordination as a psychosocial intervention must
  fulfill a dual function: coordination of psychosocial health services with biomedical services,
  and coordination of biomedical care provided by multiple clinicians.
  Healthcare systems around the world face both increasing demands and inequality in service
  distribution. The current trend is for collaboration among healthcare actors, named as
  collaborative healthcare, in order to address challenges such as these to improve the social
  sustainability of the system. That is to provide accessible and equitable healthcare services to
  meet people’s health and well-being needs.

                                               xxxiv
    In order to address the complex social, emotional, psychological, and spiritual needs patients,
    health care worker collaborate with a number of psychosocial colleagues, including but not
    limited to:
     social workers,
     child life specialists,
     chaplains,
     educators,
     creative arts therapists,
     Clinical psychologist,
     Counselor, and
     Medical clinicians
    Although psychosocial teams differ across institutions in size and composition, they all work to
    integrate their individual expertise and provide the highest quality care for patients and families.
    Essential elements of successful psychosocial collaboration include
a. shared goals,
b. role clarity, and
c. effective communication.


    Effective communication in psychosocial health care
    At the heart of an effective model of psychosocial care delivery is a well-functioning patient–
    provider partnership, characterized, in large part, by effective communication. Communicating
    effectively means that patients are able to receive and understand information about their illness
    and health care, and clearly express their needs for assistance and the values and personal
    resources that will shape the health care system’s response to these needs.
    Patients should be comfortable with asking questions of all their care providers and equally
    comfortable with responding to questions posed to them. They should be competent and at ease
    as a member of their own health care team, which will make decisions about the best strategy
    for addressing their illness. Patients with language barriers, cognitive deficits, or other
    impediments to communication should receive assistance in overcoming these barriers to
    effective communication.
    In many instances, members of the patient’s family also are involved in this communication. In
    pediatric cases, a family member may be the primary communicator and participant in planning
                                                  xxxv
    care; with adults, some patients may also have limited capacity to communicate. Even when
    adult patients are able to communicate, family members are key caregivers, especially for older
    adults. Treatment planning and planning for managing the effects of illness requires
    communication with the patient’s caregivers as well as with the patient. When patients do not
    have the capacity to participate actively themselves, there needs to be an explicit substitute who
    is legally and psychologically able to act as the patient’s advocate.
    Care providers similarly should possess the communication skills necessary to be effective
    clinicians and supportive partners in care—a hallmark of high-quality health care and health
    care professionals. These communication skills include establishing a good interpersonal
    relationship with the patient.
    Key aspects of effective patient–clinician communication identified in the National Cancer
    Institute (NCI) report Patient-Centered Communication in Cancer Care include:
a. fostering healing relationships,
b. exchanging information,
c. responding to emotions,
d. managing uncertainty,
e. making decisions, and
f. enabling patient self management
    Linking Patients to Psychosocial Health Services
    Several mechanisms used to link patients with psychosocial health services delivered by health
    and human service providers have empirical support, although the strength of this support varies.
    These mechanisms include structured referral arrangements and formal agreements with
    external providers, case management, and collocation and clinical integration of services. Use
    of care/system navigators is also being studied for its effectiveness in linking patients with
    needed services.
     Structured Referral: Although referral to other organizational or individual providers is a
      common mechanism for linking individuals with psychosocial health services, there has been
      little study of the general effectiveness of such referrals. Most studies of referral have
      addressed referrals between physicians. These and one Australian study of referrals of cancer
      patients to psychosocial services indicate high rates of failure to connect individuals to the
      referred providers, frequent failure of the referred individuals to accept the referred services,
      and failure to track the outcomes of referrals. Referring patients to external providers is likely

                                                  xxxvi
    to continue to be a primary mechanism for linking patients with needed psychosocial health
    services because it requires fewer organizational and physical plant resources than offering
    all psychosocial services on site. To conserve both psychosocial health services and the
    personnel and resources needed to make referrals, however, it is important for providers to
    implement approaches for doing so efficiently and effectively.
   Case Management: Case management consists of a variety of activities necessary to
    coordinate some or all of the health-related care needed by patients. Although these activities
    often vary with the severity of the illness, the needs of the individual, and the specific model
    of case management employed, case management services that address psychosocial health
    needs typically include assessment of the patient’s need for supportive services; individual
    care planning, referral, and connection of the patient with other necessary services and
    supports; ongoing monitoring of the patient’s care plan; advocacy and education; and
    monitoring of the patient’s symptoms. These activities can be performed by an appointed
    individual or a group.
   On-site Collocation and Clinical Integration of Services: Multiple studies of mental health
    care have found that same-site delivery of mental health and primary care is effective in
    linking patients to the collocated services and can improve treatment outcomes. In a 1995
    study of a nationally representative sample of outpatient drug use treatment units, same-site
    delivery of services was more effective than formal arrangements with external providers,
    referral agreements, or case management in ensuring that patients would utilize necessary
    services (a first step in collaborative care). Integrating psychosocial health care into medical
    care settings facilitates patient follow-through on referrals, allows for face-to-face verbal
    communication in addition to or as an alternative to communicating in writing, and allows for
    informal sharing of the views of different disciplines and easy exchange of expertise. Studies
    of care collaboration also have shown that physical proximity of would-be collaborators
    facilitates collaboration.
   Care/System Navigators: Use of care/system navigators, as well as individual patient
    advocates, is similar to case management and may also help link patients to needed
    psychosocial services. Such programs in cancer care were developed initially to help low-
    income patients participate in screening for the detection of cancer and aid those with
    suspicious screening findings in gaining access to diagnostic and treatment services. Initially,
    patient navigators tended to be local community residents without professional credentials,

                                              xxxvii
     but more recently some have proposed that nurses, social workers, and other health workers
     play a navigator role. This variation in the background of the navigator relates to differences
     in role expectations. While all navigator programs focus on helping patients overcome barriers
     to receiving effective services, some also include patient education and patient advocacy roles.
Critical Thinking
Critical thinking is the analysis of an issue or situation and the facts, data or evidence related to it.
Ideally, critical thinking is to be done objectively—meaning without influence from personal
feelings, opinions or biases—and it focuses solely on factual information.
Critical thinking is a skill that allows you to make logical and informed decisions to the best of
your ability. For example, a child who has not yet developed such skills might believe the Tooth
Fairy left money under their pillow based on stories their parents told them. A critical thinker,
however, can quickly conclude that the existence of such a thing is probably unlikely—even if
there are a few bucks under their pillow.

1. Identification

The first step in the critical thinking process is to identify the situation or problem as well as the
factors that may influence it. Once you have a clear picture of the situation and the people, groups
or factors that may be influenced, you can then begin to dive deeper into an issue and its potential
solutions.



How to improve: When facing any new situation, question or scenario, stop to take a mental
inventory of the state of affairs and ask the following questions:



            Who is doing what?

            What seems to be the reason for this happening?

            What are the end results, and how could they change?



2. Research

When comparing arguments about an issue, independent research ability is key. Arguments are
meant to be persuasive—that means the facts and figures presented in their favor might be lacking
                                                 xxxviii
in context or come from questionable sources. The best way to combat this is independent
verification; find the source of the information and evaluate.



How to improve: It can be helpful to develop an eye for unsourced claims. Does the person posing
the argument offer where they got this information from? If you ask or try to find it yourself and
there’s no clear answer, that should be considered a red flag. It’s also important to know that not
all sources are equally valid—take the time to learn the difference between popular and scholarly
articles.



3. Identifying biases

This skill can be exceedingly difficult, as even the smartest among us can fail to recognize biases.
Strong critical thinkers do their best to evaluate information objectively. Think of yourself as a
judge in that you want to evaluate the claims of both sides of an argument, but you’ll also need to
keep in mind the biases each side may possess.



How to improve: Challenge yourself to identify the evidence that forms your beliefs, and assess
whether or not your sources are credible.

First and foremost, you must be aware that bias exists. When evaluating information or an
argument, ask yourself the following:

           Who does this benefit?

           Does the source of this information appear to have an agenda?

           Is the source overlooking, ignoring or leaving out information that doesn’t support its
            beliefs or claims?

           Is this source using unnecessary language to sway an audience’s perception of a fact?



4. Inference

The ability to infer and draw conclusions based on the information presented to you is another
important skill for mastering critical thinking. Information doesn’t always come with a summary
                                                xxxix
that spells out what it means. You’ll often need to assess the information given and draw
conclusions based upon raw data.



The ability to infer allows you to extrapolate and discover potential outcomes when assessing a
scenario. It is also important to note that not all inferences will be correct. For example, if you read
that someone weighs 260 pounds, you might infer they are overweight or unhealthy. Other data
points like height and body composition, however, may alter that conclusion.



How to improve: An inference is an educated guess, and your ability to infer correctly can be
polished by making a conscious effort to gather as much information as possible before jumping
to conclusions. When faced with a new scenario or situation to evaluate, first try skimming for
clues—things like headlines, images and prominently featured statistics—and then make a point
to ask yourself what you think is going on.



5. Determining relevance

One of the most challenging parts of thinking critically during a challenging scenario is figuring
out what information is the most important for your consideration. In many scenarios, you’ll be
presented with information that may seem important, but it may pan out to be only a minor data
point to consider.



How to improve: The best way to get better at determining relevance is by establishing a clear
direction in what you’re trying to figure out. Are you tasked with finding a solution? Should you
be identifying a trend? If you figure out your end goal, you can use this to inform your judgement
of what is relevant.



Even with a clear objective, however, it can still be difficult to determine what information is truly
relevant. One strategy for combating this is to make a physical list of data points ranked in order
of relevance. When you parse it out this way, you’ll likely end up with a list that includes a couple
of obviously relevant pieces of information at the top of your list, in addition to some points at the

                                                   xl
bottom that you can likely disregard. From there, you can narrow your focus on the less clear-cut
topics that reside in the middle of your list for further evaluation.



6. Curiosity

It’s incredibly easy to sit back and take everything presented to you at face value, but that can also
be also a recipe for disaster when faced with a scenario that requires critical thinking. It’s true that
we’re all naturally curious—just ask any parent who has faced an onslaught of “Why?” questions
from their child. As we get older, it can be easier to get in the habit of keeping that impulse to ask
questions at bay. But that’s not a winning approach for critical thinking.



How to improve: While it might seem like a curious mind is just something you’re born with, you
can still train yourself to foster that curiosity productively. All it takes is a conscious effort to ask
open-ended questions about the things you see in your everyday life, and you can then invest the
time to follow up on these questions.




                                                   xli
     Caring for the caregiver
  Caregiving can be physically and emotionally exhausting. Whether you are in the profession of
  caregiving or taking care of a loved one, it is important to remember to recharge your batteries.
  For family members, caregiving can also lead to additional pressures, such as financial strain,
  family conflict, and social withdrawal. Over time, caregiver stress can lead to burnout, a
  condition marked by irritability, fatigue, problems with sleep, weight gain, feelings of
  helplessness or hopelessness, and social isolation.
  Caregiver burnout is an example of how repeated exposure to stress harms mental and physical
  health. Chronic stress triggers a release of stress hormones in the body, which can lead to
  exhaustion, irritability, a weakened immune system, digestive distress, headaches, pains, and
  weight gain, especially in the midsection of the body.
     3 ways to care for yourself if you are a caregiver
1. Self-compassion is essential to self-care: Being kind to yourself builds the foundation to self-
   care. Self-compassion means giving yourself credit for the tough, complex work of caregiving,
   stepping away from the self-critical, harsh inner voice, and allowing yourself time — even if
   it’s just a few minutes a day — to take care of yourself. Lack of time or energy can make
   getting that time away particularly challenging. You may even feel guilty or selfish for paying
   attention to your own needs. What you need to know is this: in fact, practicing self-care allows
   the caregiver to remain more balanced, focused, and effective, which helps everyone involved.
2. Make eating well and getting quality sleep priorities: It’s easy to forget about your own
   meals and needs when trying to help others. Maintaining adequate sleep and nutrition are key
   to preventing caregiver burnout. Build a daily 10-minute nighttime routine to achieve more
   restful sleep. Missing meals can lead to irritability and fatigue, so it is important to eat regularly
   scheduled meals throughout the day. Nutrition can also be an important factor to prevent
   burnout. Chronic stress has been linked to increased inflammation in the body, so it is helpful
   to avoid foods that are processed or high in refined sugars, which increase inflammation in the
   body. Avoid or reduce alcohol, since alcohol both increases inflammation in the body and
   disrupts quality of sleep.
3. Remain socially connected. Find support through local caregiver support groups: While
   it can be difficult to keep social appointments with friends and family in the face of medical
   caretaking, it is important to maintain social connections to feel less isolated and prevent
   burnout. Realizing that you’re not alone and that others are going through similar experiences

                                                  xlii
     nurtures your ability to be self-compassionate. Hospitals and local organizations often offer
     caregiver support groups for family and caregivers.
      7.2.4 Learning Activities
    Role Play activities
Task 1: Mrs. Maliwaza is 34 years old, 6 months pregnant and has visited the health center 2
times since for prenatal clinic. As you conduct a home visit to check out on the patients at the
health center, Mrs. Maliwaza explains that she has been feeling dizzy, fatigued and has been
vomiting all the time she eats.
In groups of two, role play how you would link her with relevant heath care providers.


    Self-Assessment
You are provided with the following questions for self -assessment, attempt them and check your
responses

1    What are the 3 psychosocial needs as postulated by the psychological needs theory?

2    Which psychosocial support workers can a health care worker collaborate with to effectively
     meet patients’ psychosocial needs?

3    What mechanisms can you us to link a patient with other related service?

4    In the provision of psychosocial health care, why is important to have an efficient client -
     clinician communication?

5    What are the essential elements of successful psychosocial collaboration?

      Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials
The following resources are provided:
     A counseling room with seats, a desk and tissues
     Assessment documents
     Computers
     Stationery
     Note book
            References
https://www.who.int/mental_health/evidence/MH_Promotion_Book.pdf

https://www.nap.edu/read/11993/chapter/6#160
                                                xliii
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK4023/



        Responses to self assessment

1.     What are the 3 psychosocial needs as postulated by the psychological needs theory?

•      Autonomy

•      Relatedness

•      Competence

2.     Which psychosocial support workers can a health care worker collaborate with to
effectively meet patients’ psychosocial needs?

•      social workers,

•      child life specialists,

•      chaplains,

•      educators,

•      creative arts therapists,

•      Clinical psychologist,

•      Counselor, and

•      Medical clinicians

3.     What mechanisms can you us to link a patient with other related service?

Structured referral arrangements and formal agreements with external providers, case
management, and collocation and clinical integration of services and care/system navigators

4.     In the provision of psychosocial health care, why is important to have an efficient
client - clinician communication?

•      fostering healing relationships,

•      exchanging information,

•      responding to emotions,

•      managing uncertainty,
                                              xliv
•       making decisions, and

•       enabling patient self management

5.      What are the essential elements of successful psychosocial collaboration?

•       shared goals,

•       role clarity, and

•       effective communication.



7.3 Learning Outcome 3:

Follow up on psychosocial healthcare support needs

7.3.1 Introduction to the learning outcome

This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to follow up on psychosocial
health care needs. It includes social support systems, Interpersonal skills, monitoring psychosocial
patient’s progress, reporting of psychosocial issues




7.3.2 Performance Standard

3.1 Patient condition is monitored in accordance with Standards for Psychosocial Healthcare and
     WHO standards.
3.2 Routine patient care is provided as per Standards for Psychosocial Healthcare and WHO
     standards.
3.3 Patient’s condition is reported to relevant personnel as per work policy, Standards for
     Psychosocial Healthcare and WHO standards.
3.4 Faults are reported and rectified as per workplace policy.
7.3.3 Information Sheet

Definition of terms

                                                xlv
Social support: support accessible to an individual through social ties to other individuals, groups,
and the larger community.

Social support systems

The National Cancer Institute's Dictionary of Cancer Terms defines social support as “a network
of family, friends, neighbors, and community members that is available in times of need to give
psychological, physical, and financial help”.

Theoretical models of social support specify the following two important dimensions:

a. a structural dimension, which includes network size and frequency of social interactions, and

b. a functional dimension with emotional (such as receiving love and empathy) and instrumental
    (practical help such as gifts of money or assistance with child care) components.

Most research has found that quality of relationships (functional dimension) is a better predictor
of good health than quantity of relationships (structural dimension), although both are important.

It should be noted that the optimal source of social support may depend on the developmental stage
of the person who is receiving the support. For example, parental support seems to be more
valuable in early adolescence than it is in late adolescence. It has been shown that the perception
of social support is associated with the degree of social interaction in the elderly and with
instrumental support in younger adults. In a sample of childhood sexual abuse survivors, a
combination of self-esteem support (the individual perceives that he or she is valued by others)
and appraisal support (the individual perceives that he or she is capable of getting advice when
coping with difficulties) was most useful in preventing the development of PTSD

The persons, agencies and organizations with which a caregiver has contact – directly or indirectly
– are referred to as a person’s social support system.

The benefits of having and using personal support systems include reduced stress, decreased
physical health problems, and improved emotional well-being. Taking stock of your social support
system is an excellent way to assess where your help actually comes from and who provides it.
Taking stock can also help you see reasons why you don’t ask for or accept assistance, and reasons
why people may not offer assistance.

Who are the people and organizations who help you?

   Spouse
                                                xlvi
   Parents

   Children

   Other Relatives

   Friends

   Other caregivers

   Doctor(s)

   Nurse(s)

   Support group

   Church members

   Civic group/clubs

   Schools

   Professional agencies

   Public health

   Social services

   Respite care

   Activity programs

Interpersonal skills

Interpersonal skills are measures of how adept you are at interacting with others. Active listening
is an interpersonal skill, as is knowing how to communicate to someone else that you respect him
or her. When problems arise you use your interpersonal skills to resolve conflict with others.
People learn interpersonal skills by interacting with family members, going to school, and
socializing with their peers. Healthy interpersonal skills reduce stress, resolve conflict, improve
communication, enhance intimacy, increase understanding, and promote joy.

Interpersonal skills include:

       Communication skills involve both listening and speaking effectively.


                                               xlvii
        Assertiveness skills involve expressing yourself and your rights without violating others’
         rights.

        Conflict is natural and inevitable. Conflict resolution skills help you resolve differences so
         that you may continue a relationship effectively.

        Anger management skills involve recognizing and expressing anger appropriately in order
         to achieve goals, handle emergencies, solve problems and even protect our health.

91       Interpersonal Skills Self-Assessment
Ask yourself the questions below. If you identify with a number of these statements, you would
likely benefit from work on your interpersonal skills.

How often do you…..

      Seek approval and affirmation from others, but fear criticism?

      Guess at what normal behavior is?

      Feel as if you are different from other people?

      Isolate yourself from and feel afraid of people in authority roles?

      Downplay your own accomplishments and good deeds?

      Have difficulty following a project through from beginning to end?

      Get         frightened   or   stressed   in    the    company     of    an    angry     person.
         Lie in order to avoid conflict?

      Judge yourself harshly?

      Feel that others (or society) take advantage of you?

      Take yourself seriously, and view other relationships just as seriously?

      Have problems developing and maintaining intimate relationships?

      Feel guilty when you stand up for yourself or put your needs first?

      Feel responsible for others and find it easier to have concern for others than for yourself?

      Act impulsive, before considering alternative actions or possible consequences?

      Have difficulty feeling or expressing your own feelings?
                                                 xlviii
Monitoring psychosocial patient’s progress

Patient follow-up has been cited in identifying effective interventions for improving health care
processes and outcomes. Follow-up can take place in a variety of ways, including telephone calls
to patients to monitor their status, home visits by care managers or other personnel, as part of a
scheduled outpatient visit, or through Internet or web-based technology.

Follow-up involves two discrete activities. First is the determination of which services, if any, the
patient used, any problems encountered, and satisfaction with services provided. Second is
rescreening and assessment to identify new or unmet needs that are then addressed.

Routine patient care may include but not limited to:

    Communication

    Social care support

    Feeding

    Dressing

    Washing/tidying up

    Visiting

      7.3.4 Learning Activities
    7.3.4.1 Role Play activities
Task 1: Mrs. Maliwaza is 34 years old, 8 months pregnant. From a previous home visit you linked
her with a clinician and she tested HIV positive. She was in denial and was refusing to take her
ARVs
In groups of two, role play how you would attach Mrs. Maliwaza to a social support system.
    7.3.4.2 Self-Assessment
You are provided with the following questions for self -assessment, attempt them and check your
responses

1    What are a person’s social support systems?

2    Who are the people and organizations who can help in offering psychosocial support to
     patients?

3    Which are some of the routine patient care techniques you can use during follow up?

                                                xlix
     7.3.4.3Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials
 The following resources are provided:
1.a A counseling room with seats, a desk and tissues
1.b Assessment documents
1.c Computers
1.d Stationery
1.e Note book
     7.3.5 References
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2921311/

https://conflictandhealth.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13031-018-0146-0

https://cpa.ca/docs/File/Task_Forces/Treatment%20Progress%20and%20Outcome%20Monitorin
g%20Task%20Force%20Report_Final.pdf

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0157474

Responses to the self assessment

1. What are a person’s social support systems?

   The persons, agencies and organizations with which a caregiver has contact – directly or
   indirectly

2. Who are the people and organizations who can help in offering psychosocial support to
    patients?

   Spouse, Parents, Children, Other Relatives, Friends, Other caregivers, Doctor(s), Nurse(s),
   Support group, Church members, Civic group/clubs, Schools, Professional agencies, Public
   health, Social services, Respite care, Activity programs

3. Which are some of the routine patient care techniques you can use during follow up?
    Communication, Social care support, Feeding, Dressing, Washing/tidying up, Visiting



7.4 Learning Outcome 4:

Document psychosocial healthcare support

7.4.1 Introduction to the learning outcome

                                                l
This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to document psychosocial
health care support. It includes documentation of psychosocial healthcare services, report writing
and dissemination, patient agreement, transfer reports and waste disposal

7.4.2 Performance Standard

4.1 Patient details are documented in accordance with workplace policy.
4.2 Patient’s progress reports are prepared and disseminated to relevant authorities as per
        workplace policy and WHO standards.
4.3 Waste is disposed in due regard to environment protection regulations.
7.4.3 Information Sheet

Documentation of psychosocial healthcare services

Health care workers create, and to the extent the records are under their control, maintain,
disseminate, store, retain, and dispose of records and data relating to their professional and
scientific work in order to:

       facilitate provision of services later by them or by other professionals,

       allow for replication of research design and analyses,

       meet institutional requirements,

       ensure accuracy of billing and payments, and

       ensure compliance with law.

In provision of psychosocial healthcare services, the main goal for documenting is to provide a
complete, accurate recording for follow-up, early detection of complications, and helps to identify
areas for improvement.

It also contributes to the circulation of information amongst the different teams involved in the
patient’s treatment or care.

                   Appropriate records can also help protect both the client and the psychologist in the
                   event of legal or ethical proceedings.

                   The medical record is not just a facility document it is also read by Outside readers
                   who may include:

        Insurance companies ,
                                                      li
        Surveyors ,

        Ombudsmen,

        Consultants,

        Medicare intermediaries,

        Authorized family members,

        Lawyers

Documentation must include reports of patient and/or family impact of illness, of assessments
conducted, nature and impact of psychosocial services provided, monitoring of illness status, and
treatment plans.

Psychosocial providers must be familiar with professional codes of ethics and state regulations
about protection of the privacy of health information and limits of privacy protection.

Documentation and communication with other professionals must reflect appropriate
understanding of what information is essential for team members and/or family members to know,
when specific permission is needed, and what different rules apply under extraordinary conditions
of risk of harm.

Treatment facilities may impose their own requirements for documentation as long as they comply
with state regulations, which represent the final authority. The creation and handling of electronic
medical record information should be governed by the same professional rules as other health care
communication.

Preparing and disseminating the patient’s progress reports

The patient's report must rest on empirically solid data, synthesized and explained at a level that a
layman can understand, and answer the central question at hand eg “What’s underlying the
patient’s problems with attention?”

To write a good report you should:

a       Verify that your report relies on solid data. Before the report writing even begins, make sure
        that the tests you will be citing in the report are backed by the latest research and were used
        appropriately. That process includes keeping up with the literature regarding whether a test
        produces different results for different racial/ethnic groups.

                                                      lii
b   Not hide behind the test results: Don’t hide behind the data, but rather write about what those
    findings reflect about the patient. The main concern, is understanding how to solve the
    problems that prompted the evaluation

c   Consider incorporating diversity and cultural context: A report might detail the patient’s
    family background, romantic relationships and educational or developmental history. But
    should also include a section that explores other formative experiences, including those that
    involve race, sexuality or socioeconomic status

d   Synthesize and conceptualize the findings: Integrate findings from multiple sources into a
    single section. Our recommendations are much more likely to be taken if they are understood
    in a very coherent, narrative way how we are conceptualizing them.

e   Address discordant results: It’s not uncommon for different tests to produce divergent or
    discordant results. When writing your report, resist the temptation to play up the test you favor
    and downplay the one with divergent results.

f   Strip out the jargon: Because numerous individuals may read the report, look at each
    paragraph and consider: Will a layman understand what I’m saying? If it’s meaningful and
    palatable to a non-trained reader, it will be for a trained reader as well.

g   Consider the patient’s perspective: Along with outlining a patient's vulnerabilities, it’s also
    important—for patients, who will likely read the report, as well as for treatment planning.

h   Cull the report to its essence: Most of the time when you get a really long report, it’s because
    someone was doing a data dump rather than an integrated, well-thought-out, thematically
    organized report. It’s helpful to write a summary of the referral question and primary
    conclusion at the beginning of the report and follow with a more detailed explanation further
    on.

i   Don’t lose sight of the narrative: Check that the report hasn’t simply broken down an
    individual into pieces based on their scores on tests. A report should tell a narrative about the
    person, and how all these pieces fit together.

               While disseminating progress reports on psychosocial health care services, a health
               care worker ought to:




                                                  liii
                 a   maintain confidentiality in creating, storing, accessing, transferring, and
                     disposing of records under their control, whether these are written, automated,
                     or in any other medium.

                 b   If confidential information concerning recipients of psychosocial services is
                     entered into databases or systems of records available to persons whose access
                     has not been consented to by the recipient, healthcare workers use coding or
                     other techniques to avoid the inclusion of personal identifiers.

                 c   make plans in advance to facilitate the appropriate transfer and to protect the
                     confidentiality of records and data in the event of the HCW’s withdrawal from
                     positions or practice.

Waste disposal

Sound health care waste management ensures safety and minimal effects on health care
workers, the population and the environment.

A comprehensive system should include:

a. Waste generation and minimization

b. Separation and segregation of sources

c. Identification and classification of wastes

d. Handling and storage

e. Packaging and labelling

f. Transport on site and off site

g. Disposal of residues (including emissions)

h. Consideration of occupational, public and environmental health and safety

i. Stakeholder and community awareness and education

j. Research and development           of improved technologies and environmentally friendly
    practices.

There are various types of Waste that can be generated in offering psychosocial healthcare
services. These include:

                                                  liv
 a   General waste – non hazardous, poses no risk of injury or infection

 b   Medical waste – material generated in a diagnosis, treatment, and/or immunization

 c   Hazardous chemical waste – chemicals that are potentially toxic or poisonous

All the waste generated, irrespective of type, need to be effectively disposed. The importance of
proper effective waste disposal includes;

    Minimizes spread of infection to health workers, patients and the local community

    Reduced risk of accidental injury to those who handle the waste

    Reduced likelihood of contamination of soil, ground water etc.

    Reduces attraction of insects and rodents

    Reduced odours

Guidelines for Disposal of Medical Waste include;

    Use washable, leak-proof containers

    Keep containers in convenient places

    Empty containers daily or when three-quarters full

    Never put hands into containers

    Always dispose of medical waste correctly

    Wear utility gloves and shoes

    Wash the gloves and your hands afterward

    Dispose off all sharps in puncture-resistant containers

    Burn or bury the container of sharps




                                                 lv
Figure 1.2 Colour coding for waste segregation



7.4.4 Learning Activities

7.4.4.1 Practical Activity

       Task 1: Attend a home visit in your nearby health center and identify:

            .a types of waste generated

            .b Types of documents to keep

            .c Ways of waste disposals

7.4.4.2 Self-Assessment

You are provided with the following questions for self -assessment, attempt them and check your
responses

1. Why do health care workers create, disseminate and dispose patients’ documents?

2. What colours are used in waste segregation?

3. Which documentations should be included in offering of psychosocial health care services?

4. Who are some of the outsider readers who can help themselves to patients’ medical records?

5. What guidelines can you use for disposal of medical waste?

7.4.4.3 Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials
                                              lvi
The following resources are provided:

Stationery

Note book

Gloves

Water and soap

         Sanitizer



7.4.5 References

https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/pbc.25725

https://www.nema.go.ke/images/Docs/Media%20centre/Publication/National%20Solid%20Wast
e%20Management%20Strategy%20.pdf

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/255600967_Report_Writing_Process_principles_and_s
tyles



Responses to the self-assessment questions

 1. Why do health care workers create, disseminate and dispose patients’ documents?

            facilitate provision of services later by them or by other professionals,

            allow for replication of research design and analyses,

            meet institutional requirements,

            ensure accuracy of billing and payments, and

            ensure compliance with law.

 2. What colours are used in waste segregation?

         Yellow, black and red

 3. Which documentations should be included in offering of psychosocial health care
    services?


                                                 lvii
     reports of patient and/or family impact of illness, of assessments conducted, nature and
     impact of psychosocial services provided, monitoring of illness status, and treatment plans

4. Who are some of the outsider readers who can help themselves to patients’ medical
   records?

     •        Insurance companies ,

     •        Surveyors ,

     •        Ombudsmen,

     •        Consultants,

     •        Medicare intermediaries,

     •        Authorized family members

5. What guidelines can you use for disposal of medical waste?

     •        Use washable, leak-proof containers

     •        Keep containers in convenient places

     •        Empty containers daily or when three-quarters full

     •        Never put hands into containers

     •        Always dispose of medical waste correctly

     •        Wear utility gloves and shoes

     •        Wash the gloves and your hands afterward

     •        Dispose off all sharps in puncture-resistant containers

     •        Burn or bury the container of sharps




                                                lviii
CHAPTER 8 SAFETY




                   lix
CHAPTER 9


PREVENTION OF NOSOCOMIAL INFECTIONS




                              lx
lxi
lxii
                                    Background Information

 This learning guide will enable the trainee to acquire competencies to undertake various
  processes in Prevention of Nosocomial Infections. It provides practical and theoretical learning
  activities, simplified content, illustrations and self-assessment items to guide the trainee in the
  learning process. It also provides links and references for further reading.
                                  Layout of the Trainee Guide

 Performance standards: These are obtained from the performance criteria statements in the
 related unit of competency of the Occupational Standards (OS).

 Information Sheet: This section covers information relating to the specific learning outcome.
 This information should include but not limited to meaning of terms, methods, processes/
 procedures/ guidelines, Illustrations (pictures, digital content links, simulations links) and case
 studies. This section also provides additional information sources relevant to the learning
 outcome e.g. books, web links.

 Learning activities: This section covers practical activities related to the Performance Criteria
 statements, Knowledge in relation to Performance Criteria as given under content in the
 curriculum Special instructions related to learning activities.

Self-Assessment: This section must be related to the Performance Criteria, Required Knowledge
and Skills in the Occupational Standards. This section requires the trainee to evaluate their
acquisition of skills, knowledge and attitude in relation to the learning outcome. A variety of
assessment items such as written and practical tests, which emphasizes on the application of
knowledge, skills and attitude, is recommended.
The self-assessment items should be valid, relevant and comprehensive to the level of qualification
in the learning outcome.

Tools, equipment, materials and supplies: This section should provide for the requirements of
the learning outcome in terms of tools, equipment, supplies and materials. The section should be
adequate, relevant and comprehensive for the learning outcome.

References: Information sources should be quoted and presented as required in the APA format
The units of learning covered in this learning guide are as presented in the table below:




                                                lxiii
Table 10. Common units of Learning

 Unit code                                       Unit Title
 HE/CU/TT/CC/01/6/A                              Human Anatomy and Physiology
 HE/CU/TT/CC/02/6/A                              Basic Hospital Procedures
 HE/CU/TT/CC/03/6/A                              Common Diseases
 HE/CU/TT/CC/04/6/A                              Provision of First-aid Services
 HE/CU/TT/CC/05/6/A                              Application of Medical-legal Ethics
 HE/CU/TT/CC/06/6/A                              Provision of Health Education and
                                                 Promotion Services
 HE/CU/TT/CC/07/6/A                              Provision of Psychosocial Health Support

Table 11. Core units of learning

 Unit Code                         Unit Title

 HE/CU/TT/CR/01/6/A                 Execution of perioperative theatre safety precautions
 HE/CU/TT/CR/02/6/A                Prevention of Nosocomial Infections
 HE/CU/TT/CR/03/6/A                Maintenance of Perioperative Theatre Instruments and
                                   Apparatus
 HE/CU/TT/CR/04/6/A                Provision of Perioperative Theatre Technical Services
 HE/CU/TT/CR/05/6/A                Execution of Perioperative Theatre Administrative
                                   Services
 HE/CU/TT/CR/06/6/A                Management of Perioperative Theatre Resources
 HE/CU/TT/CR/07/6/A                Participation in Perioperative Theatre Clinical Services
                                   Industrial Attachment




                                          lxiv
  CHAPTER 1: PREVENTION OF NOSOCOMIAL INFECTIONS

 Unit of learning code- HE/CU/TT/CR/02/6/A
 Related Unit of Competency in Occupational Standard: Prevent Nosocomial Infections
 Introduction to the unit of learning
 This unit describes the competencies required to Prevent Nosocomial Infections.
 This unit describes the competencies required to prevent and control nosocomial infections. It
 involves handling Operation Theatre instruments and patients in the Operation Theatre room.
 Necessary precautions are taken in the context of theatre setting to avoid infections.
 Summary of Learning Outcomes
 Prepare surgical instruments
 Prepare patient for surgery
 Dispose theatre waste

  1.2.1 Learning Outcome 1
  Prepare surgical instruments
  1.2.1.1 Introduction to the learning outcome
  This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to plan for Prevent
  Nosocomial Infections. It includes:
    Infection prevention
    Personal OT protective gears
    Sterilization
    Decontamination
    Waste management
    Aseptic techniques
    Types of surgical instruments
    Types of surgical packs and sets
    Types of surgery
    Sterilization in Operation Theatre
    Safety practices in Operation Theatre
    Packing of surgical instruments
    Theatre layout
    Laminar flow in Operation Theatre
                             92     1.2.1.2 Performance Standard
    Instruments and packs are decontaminated using detergents according to manufacturer’s
       instructions, laid down policies and WHO standards
      Instruments and packs are packed according to surgical procedure manual
      Instruments and packs are sterilized according to WHO standards
      Surgical packs and instruments are selected according to the surgical procedure to be done
       and WHO
                                              lxv
    Laminar flow system is operated as per the recommended manufacturers’ instruction
   1.2.1.3 Information Sheet
     Infection prevention
Infection prevention is a scientific approach and practical solution designed to prevent harm
caused by infection to patients and health workers.
Personal OT protective gears
These are physical barriers used to prevent transmission of infection to the patient or from the
patient to the persons attending them. They include Gloves, Gowns/Aprons, Surgical masks,
Protective eyewear, Headgear and Boots.
Gowns and Aprons
These should be made of waterproof material and worn full size to give maximum protection.
They should be used when splashing of blood or other body fluids or when any other potentially
infectious materials are anticipated.
Gloves
Provide a barrier against potentially infectious microorganisms in blood, other body fluids, and
medical waste, thus lowering the risk of transmitting infections to both health care workers and
patients. Sterile surgical gloves should be worn during all procedures in which the main aim is
to avoid introduction of pathogens into the patient, for example during surgical procedures.
Single use examination gloves should be worn for all procedures in which the healthcare worker
will be in contact with intact mucous membranes.
Masks and Eye Shields
These provide some protection against airborne pathogens and shield against splashes.
Headgear and Boots
Caps are worn full length to cover the head. Boots and shoe covers should be waterproof




                                             lxvi
lxvii
lxviii
Sterilization
Sterilization Processes by which all pathogenic and non-pathogenic microorganisms, including
endospores, are killed. This term refers only to a validated process capable of destroying all
forms of microbial life, including endospores. The sterilizer is a piece of equipment used to
attain either physical or chemical sterilization. The agent used must be capable of killing all
forms of microorganisms.

Decontamination
Cleaning reusable items with an approved sporicidal disinfectant to render the item safe for
handling. Decontamination of instrumentation is performed in a designated area by specially
trained personnel immediately after completion of the surgical procedure. The scrub person can
facilitate the instrument decontamination process by wiping instruments as they are used on the
sterile field and then opening the instruments completely before placing in a tray for return to
the processing area. This is referred to as point of use cleaning. An enzymatic cleaner such as a
foam or solution can applied to the instruments to prevent debris from drying during transport
to the central service area. All instruments on the table during a surgical procedure require
decontamination before processing to the required level of safety for patient use.

Decontamination combines mechanical or manual cleaning and a physical or chemical
microbicidal process. Prerinsing, washing, rinsing, and disinfecting/sterilizing is done in the
processing department to render the instrumentation safe for handling. This part of the process
is referred to as thorough cleaning or return-to-use cleaning.

Waste management
Health care waste is a potential reservoir of pathogenic microorganisms and requires
appropriate, safe, and reliable handling. Safe management of health care waste is a key issue in
controlling and reducing HAIs. There should be a person or persons responsible for the
organization and management (collection, storage, and disposal) of waste. Waste management
should be conducted in coordination with the infection-control team.

Purpose of proper waste management

    Protect people who handle waste items from accidental injury
    Prevent the spread of infection to patients, clients, and HCWs
    Prevent the spread of infection to the local community
    Safely dispose of hazardous materials
                                              lxix
Categorization of health care waste
    Infectious waste (e.g., tissues, materials, or equipment that have been in contact with
     blood or other body fluids).
    Pathological waste (e.g., tissues, organs, body parts, blood, infected animals from
     laboratories, and body fluids).
    Sharps (e.g., needles, hypodermic needles, scalpels, and other blades, knives, infusion
     sets, saws, and broken glass)
    Pharmaceutical waste (e.g., expired, spilt, and contaminated pharmaceutical products,
     discarded bottles or boxes with residues, and drug vials).
    Radioactive waste includes solid, liquid, and gaseous materials contaminated with
     radionuclide.
    Genotoxic/cytotoxic waste may include certain cytotoxic drugs often used in cancer
     therapy, vomit, urine or feces from patients treated with cytotoxic drugs, chemicals, and
     radioactive material.
    Chemical waste consists of discarded solid, liquid, and gaseous chemicals (e.g., from
     diagnostic and experimental work and from cleaning, housekeeping, and disinfecting
     procedures).
    Waste with heavy metal content includes waste containing mercury, cadmium, lead, and
     drugs containing arsenic, among others.
    Non-infectious/general waste includes waste generated from offices, kitchens, packaging
     material, and from stores. It is similar to domestic waste.
    Other wastes generated from health care settings include:
          Electronic waste.
          Construction waste.
          Obsolete equipment/furniture.
Principles of Waste Management
Key steps in the management of health care waste are as follows:
1. Waste minimization
2. Segregation (separation)
3. Collection
4. Transportation

                                               lxx
5. Storage
6. Treatment
7. Disposal




               lxxi
lxxii
Aseptic techniques
The methods by which microbial contamination is contained in the environment are referred to
as aseptic technique.
Some key elements of asepsis include the following :
    Items have been cleaned and decontaminated so they are safe to handle with clean, bare
     hands.
    Items in use in patient care are handled with examination gloves for the protection of
     both the caregiver and the patient.
    Items have been cleaned, decontaminated, disinfected, or terminally sterilized without a
     wrapper, and stored in a clean, dry place.
    Items may start out sterile but are not maintained or used under sterile conditions. Skin
     preps may be packaged sterile, but skin cannot be sterilized. The process is aseptic.
    Contamination is contained. Extraneous contamination is avoided.
    Items are set up on clean towels or drapes and used with examination gloves.
    Items are not sterile or maintained sterile during use. Extraneous contamination is
     avoided.
    Disposable items are not cleaned and reused for another patient.
    Items are classified as semicritical or noncritical by Spaulding’s classification of the
     importance of patient care items.
    Items can be used outside the confines of the restricted area.
    Items are used on intact skin or mucous membranes.
    Items are not used when the patient’s vascular system will be entered.
Types of surgical instruments
Classes of instrument by function
    Cutting instruments and dissecting
    Grasping or holding instruments
    Hemostatic instruments.
    Retractors
    Tissue unifying instruments and materials: needle holders, surgical needles, staplers, clips
Instruments used for dissecting and cutting
They have sharp edges. They are used to dissect, incise, separate or excise tissue. They should
be kept separate from other instruments. Examples:
                                             lxxiii
 •   Scalpels, knives, scissors
         Types of Scissors
 •   Blades may be straight, angled or curved.
 •   It may also be pointed or blunt at the tip
 •   To maintain the sharpness scissors should be used for intended purpose
  Sutures scissors-Used to cut sutures and supplies. have blunt points to avoid cutting
     structures near the suture
  Tissue /dissecting scissors-Most have sharp blades .curved or angled blade are needed
  mayo scissors- they are curved used to cut heavy tissues
  Metzbaum(metz)- used to cut delicate tissues
  Wire scissors- have short heavy blades. They are used to cut stainless steel sutures
  Dressing/bandage scissors- used to cut drains, dressing.
          Bone cutters/ debulking tools-They are suitable for cutting into or through a bone and
           cartilages. They include chisel, osteomes, gauges, rasps and files
          Curette- tissue / bone is removed by scrapping with sharp edge of the loop
Grasping and holding
Tissues should be grasped and held in a position so that the surgeon can perform the desired
manoeuvre without injuring the surrounding tissue.
    Dissecting forceps
    Smooth/thumb forceps- resemble tweezers.They have serrations at the tip used for
     grasping delicate tissues
    Toothed forceps- have single tooth on one side that fits perfectly between the teeth on the
     opposite side. Provide firm hold on tough tissue i.e skin
    Allis forceps- each jaw curves slightly inward and there is raw of teeth at the end
    Babecock- the end of jaw is rounded section and fenestrated. Used in grasping delicate
     tissue
    cocker
    Tenaculums- curved or angled points at the end of jaws. Penetrate tissues to grasp firmly
    Stone forceps- used to grasp calculi
    Bone holders used to stabilise the bone
 Clamping and occluding
    They are used to apply pressure. Mostly used for clamping blood vessels
                                               lxxiv
    Haemostats/artery forceps- have either straight or curved jaws. Have serrations that goes
     across the jaws.
    Crushing clamps- used to crash or clamp blood vessels
    Non-crashing clamps- used to occlude major blood vessels temporarily which minimizes
     tissue trauma
 Exposing and retracting
They hold organs and tissues away from surgical site so that the surgeon can see clearly and Can
have room to operate EXAMPLES
  Handled retractors- they have a blade on handle. They are used in pairs and are used by
     first and second assistant i.e malleable- may bent to desired angle or length
  Hooks- they are used to retract delicate tissues
  Self retaining retractors- holding device with two or more blades. Can be inserted to
     spread the edges of an incision and hold them apart.
 Viewing
 Used for viewing interior body cavities, hollow organs and structures and include speculum
 and endoscopies
 Suctioning and aspirating
 Blood, body fluids and irrigating solutions may be removed by mechanical suction or manual
 aspiration
Types of surgical packs and sets
Classification of sets
Specific sets
General sets
    Inspect each instrument before and after use to detect imperfections.
    Set aside damaged instruments and send them for repair or replacement promptly.
    Use instruments only for the purpose for which they are designed.
    Handle instruments gently
    Provide protection for delicate instruments
    Clean instruments meticulously.
    Keep oil away from instruments
     Give instruments regular maintenance.
     Take inventory
                                              lxxv
     Rotate sterile instruments in order to use item according to expiring date
     Sterile packs may be stored up to the expiry date
Types of surgery
Surgery is defined as the art of science of treating diseases, injuries and deformities by
operations and instrumentations
Classification of surgery
 1. Elective-Does not require urgent intervention, it is planned and performed when patient
      chooses.
 2. Urgent -Necessary for patient’s health. Is indicated to prevent additional health problems
      from occurring
 3. Emergency-Performed immediately to save the individual’s life or preserve function of a
      body part
 4. Required-Patient needs to have surgery, Plan within a few weeks or month i.e Prostatic
      hyperplasia without bladder obstruction, Cataracts
 5. Optional-Decision rests with patient and it is a Personal preference i.e Cosmetic surgery
Sterilization in Operation Theatre
Bacterial endospores (e.g., clostridia and bacillus) are the most resistant of all living organisms
because of their capacity to withstand external destructive agents. Although the physical or
chemical process by which all pathogenic and non-pathogenic microorganisms (including
endospores) are destroyed is not absolute, supplies and equipment are considered sterile when
all
parameters have been met during a sterilization process.
Reliability Parameters for Sterilization
Two types of parameters are considered for the reliability of sterilizing methods: product-
associated parameters and process-associated parameters.
Product-Associated Parameters
     Bioburden. The degree of contamination with microorganisms and organic debris
     Bioresistance. Factors such as heat and/or moisture sensitivities and product stability
     Biostate. The nutritional, physical, and/or reproductive phase of microorganisms
     Bioshielding. Characteristics of the packaging materials
     Density. Factors affecting penetration and evacuation of the agent
Process-Associated Parameters

                                              lxxvi
     Temperature
     Humidity/moisture/hydration
     Time
     Purity of the agent and air, and the residual effects or residues
     Saturation/penetration
     Capacity of the sterilizer and the position of items within the chamber
Methods of Sterilization
Reliable sterilization depends on the contact of the sterilizing agent with all surfaces of the item
to be sterilized. Selection of the agent used to achieve sterility depends primarily on the nature
of
the item to be sterilized. The time required to kill endospores in the available equipment then
becomes critical. Sterilization processes are either physical or chemical, and each method has
its
advantages and disadvantages. The following are available sterilizing agents (sterilants):
1. Thermal (physical)
a. Steam under pressure/moist heat
b. Hot air/dry heat
2. Chemical
a. Ethylene oxide gas
b. Formaldehyde gas and solution
c. Hydrogen peroxide plasma/vapor
d. Ozone gas
e. Acetic acid solution
f. Glutaraldehyde solution
g. Peracetic acid 0.2% solution
h. Hypochlorous acid (electrochemical conversion process)
3. Radiation (physical)
a. Microwave (nonionizing)
b. X-ray (ionizing)
Sterilization Cycle
The time required to achieve sterilization is referred to as the process cycle, which includes the
following:
                                              lxxvii
• Heat up and/or penetration of the agent
• Kill time (i.e., exposure to the agent)
• Safety factor for bioburden
• Evacuation or dissipation of the agent
Chemical Sterilizing Agents
The chemical agents used to sterilize heat-sensitive items can be toxic or can vaporize to emit
noxious fumes that are irritating to the eyes and nasal passages, even at low levels of exposure.
Ethylene Oxide
Ethylene oxide (EO) is used in a gaseous form for sterilization and is a known mutagen and
carcinogen. The residual products can be toxic if there is direct contact with the skin or the gas
is inhaled. Exposure can cause dizziness, nausea, and vomiting. Ethylene glycol and ethylene
chlorohydrin are by products of a reaction with moisture, such as on the hands. All porous items
sterilized with EO should be aerated to dissipate the gas.
Formaldehyde
Formaldehyde may be used in a gaseous or liquid form. The vapors are toxic to the respiratory
tract. Formaldehyde is a potent allergen, mutagen, and carcinogen, and it can cause liver toxicity.
Glutaraldehyde
Glutaraldehyde is the least toxic of the three sterilizing agents, but the fumes from the liquid
form may be irritating to the eyes, nose, and throat. Contact dermatitis and hives have been
reported. Glutaraldehyde should be used only in a closed container and in a well-ventilated area.
Thermal Sterilization
Heat is a dependable physical agent for the destruction of all forms of microbial life, including
endospores. It may be used moist or dry. The most reliable and commonly used method of
sterilization is steam under pressure.
Steam Under Pressure (Moist Heat Sterilization)
Heat destroys microorganisms, and this process is hastened by the addition of moisture. Steam
in itself is inadequate for sterilization. Pressure that is greater than atmospheric pressure is
necessary to increase the temperature of steam for the thermal destruction of microbial life.
Moist heat in the form of steam under pressure causes the denaturation and coagulation of
protein or the enzyme protein system within cells. Direct saturated steam contact is the basis of
the steam sterilization process. For a specified time and at a required temperature, the steam
must penetrate every fiber and reach every surface of the items to be sterilized. When steam

                                             lxxviii
 enters the sterilizer chamber under pressure, it condenses on contact with cold items. This
 condensation liberates heat, simultaneously heating and wetting all items in the load and thereby
 providing the two requisites:
 moisture and heat. This sterilization process is spoken of in terms of degrees of temperature and
 time of exposure—not in terms of pounds of pressure. Pressure increases the boiling temperature
 of water but in itself has no significant effect on microorganisms or steam penetration.
 Exposure time depends on the size and contents of the load and the temperature within the
 sterilizer. At the end of the cycle, reevaporation of water condensate must effectively dry
 contents of the load to maintain sterility; the water is dried from the sterilized pack or item.
 The vegetative forms of most microorganisms are killed in a few minutes at temperatures
 ranging from 130° F to 150° F (54° C-65° C); however, bacterial endospores will withstand a
 temperature of 240° F (115° C) for more than 3 hours. No living thing can survive direct
 exposure to saturated steam at 250° F (121° C) for longer than 15 minutes. As the temperature
 of the steam is increased, the time of exposure may be decreased. A minimum temperature-time
 relationship is maintained throughout all portions of the load to accomplish effective
 sterilization.
 Advantages of Steam Sterilization
  i.   Steam sterilization is the easiest, safest, and surest method of onsite sterilization. Heat- and
       moisture-stable items that can be steam sterilized without damage should be processed with
       this method.
ii.    Steam is the fastest method; its total time cycle is the shortest.
iii.   Steam is the least expensive and most easily supplied agent. It is piped in from the facility’s
       boiler room. An automatic, electrically powered steam generator can be mounted beneath
       the sterilizer for emergency standby when steam pressure is low.
iv.    Most sterilizers have automatic controls and recording devices that eliminate the human
       factor from the sterilization process as much as possible when operated and cared for
       according to the recommendations of the manufacturer.
 v.    Steam leaves no harmful residue. Many items such as stainless steel instruments withstand
       repeated processing without damage.
 Disadvantages of Steam Sterilization
  i.   Precautions must be use used in preparing and packaging items, loading and operating the
       sterilizer, and drying the load.

                                                lxxix
 ii.    Items need to be clean, free of grease and oil, and not sensitive to heat.
 iii.   Steam must have direct contact with all areas of an item. It must be able to penetrate
        packaging material, but the material must be able to maintain sterility.
 iv.    The timing of the cycle is adjusted for differences in materials and sizes of loads; these
        variables are subject to human error.
  v.    Steam may not be pure. Steam purity refers to the amount of solid, liquid, or vapor
        contamination in steam. Impurities can cause wet or stained packs and stained instruments.
  Dry Heat Sterilization
  Dry heat in the form of hot air is used primarily to sterilize anhydrous oils, petroleum products,
  and talc, which steam and ethylene oxide gas cannot penetrate. The destruction of microbial life
  by dry heat is a physical oxidation or slow burning process that involves coagulating the protein
  in cells. Higher temperatures are required in the absence of moisture because the
  microorganisms
  are destroyed through a very slow process of heat absorption by conduction. Dry heat sterilizers
  are not commonly found in the OR processing areas. Dry heat is commonly used in dental suites.
  Advantages of Dry Heat Sterilization
   i.   Hot air penetrates certain substances that cannot be sterilized by steam sterilization or
        another method.
 ii.    Dry heat is a protective method of sterilizing some delicate, sharp, or cutting-edge
        instruments. Steam may erode or corrode cutting edges.
  Disadvantages of Dry Heat Sterilization
   i.   A long exposure period is required, because hot air penetrates slowly and possibly
        unevenly.
 ii.    The time and temperature required will vary for different substances.
 iii.   Overexposure may ruin some substances.
  Safety practices in Operation Theatre
Surgical care is a fundamental part of healthcare around the globe. Ensuring surgical safety in
operation theatres is the need of the hour. A safe operating theatre is achieved only through
careful planning, maintenance and periodic checks, as well as proper ongoing training for staff.
An operating theatre is a complex system with numerous risk factors, including not only the
features of the structure and its fixtures, but also the management and behaviour of healthcare



                                                 lxxx
workers. Safe surgeries ensure less morbidity and mortality, improved quality of work, less
liability, and greater efficiency.




  There is increasing evidence that to achieve the full benefit of the checklist, there needs to be an
  understanding of, and a strategy for, mitigating the technical, socio-political, and psychological
  barriers to using the checklist. Freestanding surgical units may need to be particularly vigilant
  in ensuring that personnel and equipment are in good condition for surgery. Protocols and
  procedures to identify and manage stress and fatigue in surgical personnel may help to avoid
  surgical errors and patient injuries. The operating room is an appropriate educational
  environment, but the presence of observers at any level must not be allowed to compromise
  patient safety. Patient safety in surgery demands skilled individuals using well-functioning
  equipment under adequate supervision.
  Modern Issues of Patient Safety
  Medical errors are inescapable in healthcare profession. The identification of causes and
  implementation of safety plans to reduce these errors will help to establish an effective patient
  safety in operation theatres. The causes advocated by WHO are enlisted below:
  • Lack of continuous training and education
  • Past tolerance of unsafe practice
  • Lack of regulations /rules

                                                lxxxi
• Gaps in communication among different healthcare providers
• Gaps in communications between healthcare providers and patients
• Unstable /unreliable systems
• Fear of admission of guilt / wrong doing
• Human factors


Special Considerations for Surgical Procedures
Procedure Scheduling
Scheduling the procedure is very important and is a form of OT planning. All surgery requests
should be made in writing and verbal requests by the medical staff should be avoided to prevent
any errors in scheduling the procedure. Verification of every document including consent,
history, and surgeon orders at the time of scheduling is necessary. Electronic medical records
improve the safety process, decreases misunderstandings and missing documents.


Pre-operative measures to prevent errors
A preoperative check up by the concerned doctor gives an added opportunity to correct any
mistakes and inconsistencies in the documentation. All discrepancies should be mended at this
step before proceeding further with surgical procedure. The informed consent should be duly
signed before the procedure. Patient should be explained about the surgical procedure,
associated complications, additional procedures, placement of foreign material (Meshes, Plates,
Screws, Stents). The next approach is to mark the site of the procedure to avoid wrong site
surgery. The formulated guidelines for marking the site are; involving the patient while
performing site marking, to be marked by a licensed practitioner who is responsible for the
procedure and the marks should be unambiguous and uniform within the institution and should
be semi-permanent to be visible after skin preparation and draping.
The institution should have a written process to ensure that the correct site is operated on.
Alternatively, radiopaque markers can be used in the procedures involving fluoroscopy. Surgical
armamentarium (e.g. required instruments, guide wires, laser fibres, scopes, stents, loops,
prosthesis, etc.) should be verified prior to procedure.


In OT Just Before the Commencement of Surgery



                                              lxxxii
Implementation of safety checklist as proposed by WHO is the main objective at this stage. This
helps in improving the outcomes. The timeout is a critical advantage to pause and be sure that
the team is aligned about what is being done to whom in which location," Double- and triple-
checking a patient's surgical information is worth the extra time to avoid errors. Conduction of
timeouts on electronic white boards ensures correct patient identification, site marking, draping
and other essential elements are followed. The collaboration of team members in this task is
essential at every step for smooth work up. In the modern age of medicine, digital images,
displaying the CT-scan, X-rays on an auxiliary monitor during the procedure act as a guide for
surgeons and improve patient safety.
The consequences of positioning related injuries are preventable but can be profound and can
result in morbidity, and litigation. Neurological, vascular, musculoskeletal, and pressure ulcers
are the most common position related injuries in surgical patients. Neurological complications
can be avoided by placing forearms in neutral position or slightly supinated to minimise pressure
in the cubital tunnel. It is advised to strap and place them adequately to maintain the correct limb
position during the procedure even if the surgical table is moved. The patient’s head should be
placed in a neutral position and the arm should not exceed abduction of more than 90° to avoid
brachial plexus injury. Straps should not be too tight to prevent ischemia and compartmental
syndrome. Padding under osseous prominences can help avoid pressure-related complications.
Surgeons must be observant to avoid possible compartment syndrome (limbs) when positioning
patients for open, endoscopic, and laparoscopic surgeries.




                                              lxxxiii
Collection of Biopsies and Surgical Specimens
A large amount of patients, multiple samples from the same patient, lack of staff, and lack of
continuous education and training of healthcare workers account for medical errors.
Documentation, writing policies and protocols detailing responsibilities makes the task simpler
and avoid errors. To make the process as simple as possible, reducing the number of steps
between collecting the samples and receiving the laboratory report should be encouraged.
Procedures that involve biopsy and tissue sampling a specimen may pass through the hands of
more than twenty individuals in several workplaces until the final pathology report is given.
These handoffs significantly increase the risk of a mix-up and can lead to serious diagnostic
errors. Mutual cooperation for supervision of clinicians, technicians, and administrative
assistants is essential to prevent and detect errors. The most precarious steps of the biopsy
process include labelling of the specimens, appropriate request forms, and accessioning of
biopsy specimens. The modern methods for data entry, automated systems for patient
identification and specimen labeling, as well as two or more identifiers during sample collection
are important steps to reduce misidentification. If misidentification is detected, rejection then

                                            lxxxiv
recollection is the most suitable approach to manage the specimen. The introduction of
innovative methods DNA analysis to assist with correct identification can be used when
recollection is not available.
Postoperative Discharge Work up
Planning a discharge has been shown to influence patient outcomes; patient safety can prevent
readmissions and improve patient satisfaction. Patient education (Postoperative instruction
charts) is when they are discharged home with catheters, stomas, stents, drains, or any other
medical device that needs special care. Patient education can reduce complications and improve
their quality of life after surgical procedures. Healthcare workers must be aware that language
barriers, socioeconomic status, and age can impact patient comprehension of instructions.


Medication Safety During Administration
Medication safety is ensured by applying the five R’s: right drug, right route, right time, right
dose, and right patient. Medication errors are barriers that prevent the right patient from
receiving the right drug in the right dose at the right time through the right route of
administration at any stage during medication use, with or without the occurrence of adverse
drug events.


Modern systems of information technology, such as computerised order entry, automated
dispensing, barcode medication administration, electronic medication reconciliation, and
personal health records are essential in the prevention of medication errors. Electronic medical
records help in rapidly screening the medication regimens of hospitalised patients and deliver
timely, point-of-care intervention when indicated.
The most common prescribing errors are incorrect drug, incorrect dose, allergies, and drug-drug
interaction. It is important to tailor prescriptions for individual patients, identifying allergies,
pregnancy, lactation, age, co-morbidities. Healthcare workers must be familiar with the
medications they prescribe and need to know the medications in their specialty that are
associated with high risk of detrimental effects. Drug interactions can lead to serious adverse
events or decrease drug efficacy. Prescribing health-care workers should ask patients of any use
of over-the-counter medications or dietary supplements because they are frequently under
reported and may cause drug interactions. Prescribing the generic name of drugs simplifies the
communication among healthcare workers, reducing errors. However, patients need to be

                                              lxxxv
educated that their medication may be called by different names (brand and generic name) and
they should be encouraged to keep a list of their medications, including both the brand and
generic name of each drug.
Packing of surgical instruments
To be effective, the sterilizing agent must come into direct contact with all surfaces of every
instrument. Therefore instruments must be packaged (individually or in sets) in such a way to
allow adequate exposure to the sterilant, prevent air from being trapped and moisture from being
retained during the sterilization process, and ensure sterile transfer to the sterile field.The
majority of surgical instruments are made of stainless steel and can be sterilized by steam under
pressure. Effective steam sterilization involves the direct contact of all surfaces with steam and
the revaporization of water condensate to produce a dry, sterile instrument.
Instrument Packaging
For sterilizing and transporting, instruments are put in a closed container or wrapped
individually. Instruments placed in open trays are wrapped as sets. Instruments may be sterilized
unwrapped in a high-speed steam sterilizer immediately before use (not recommended), may be
prepared in advance as for a case cart, or may be retained in sterile core storage until needed.
Packaging Considerations
The packaging materials for all methods of sterilization should do the following:
    Permit penetration of the sterilizing agent to achieve sterilization of all items in the
     package.
    Allow the release of the sterilizing agent at the end of the exposure period and allow
     adequate drying or aerating.
    Withstand the physical conditions of the sterilizing process.
    Maintain integrity of the package at varying atmospheric and humidity levels. In dry
     climates or at high altitudes, some packaging materials are susceptible to rupture during
     sterilization or dry out and crack in storage.
    Provide an impermeable barrier to microorganisms, dust particles, and moisture after
     sterilization. Items must remain sterile from the time they are removed from the sterilizer
     until they are used.
    Cover items completely and easily and fasten securely with adhesive strip or a heat seal
     that cannot be resealed after opening. Seal integrity should be tamperproof. A margin of at
     least 1 inch (2.5 cm) is considered a standard for safety on all sealed packages. Scissors

                                             lxxxvi
     should not be used to cut off the end of a package. Contents cannot be drawn out over this
     cut end because the contents would be contaminated by the edge of the packaging material.
     For the same reason, packages are never torn open below a seal.
    Resist tears and punctures in handling. If accidental tears and holes do occur, they must be
     visible.
    Identification of the contents and the chemical indicator evidence of exposure to a
     sterilizing agent should be placed on a label that is visible on the outside of the package.
    Be free of toxic ingredients and nonfast dyes.
    Be lint-free or low-linting.
    Protect the contents from physical damage.
    Permit easy removal of the contents with transfer to the sterile field without contamination
     or delamination (separation into layers).
     Be economical.
Packages should be wrapped far enough away from sterile storage areas so that mixing sterile
and nonsterile packages is not possible. Cabinets that contain nonsterile items should be labelled
conspicuously. A procedure for sending items to and receiving items from the sterilizer should
be set up so that sterile and nonsterile packages can never be confused en route. This procedure
must be understood by everyone.
Packages may be wrapped with nonwoven or woven materials sequentially in two layers.
Double-thickness wrapping in one layer without using the sequential method is also acceptable.
The wrappers can be stitched around the edges or bonded/fused together. Aseptic presentation
to the sterile field is the prime consideration. Each facility should determine which method and
material is best suited to the clinical environment.
Video link on packaging of surgical instruments
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FF5D6flcra0


Theatre layout
The overall floor plan of the surgical suite is divided into three areas or zones, which are directly
or indirectly involved with the operative procedure equipment, supplies, and personnel.
For descriptive purposes the zones represent the type of activities, dress code, or restriction for
that zone. Each person working within the suite must abide by policies related to the zones.
The Three - Zone Concept

                                              lxxxvii
 1. The outer zone - The unrestricted area
        Provides an entrance and exit from the surgical suite for personnel, equipment and
         patients.
        Street clothes are permitted in this area, and the area provides access to communicate
         with personnel within and without the suite.
        This zone should contain:
  A main access door;
  An accessible area for the removal of waste;
  A sluice;
  Storage for medical and surgical supplies;
  An entrance to the changing facilities
 2. The clean or semi-restricted zone
        Provides access to the procedure room and peripheral support areas within the surgical
         unit.
        Personnel entering this area must be in proper theatre attire.
        Traffic control must be designed to prevent violation of this area by unauthorized
         personnel or persons improperly attired for this zone.
     This zone contains:
          The sterile supplies store;
          An anesthetic room;
          A recovery area (PACU);
          A clean corridor;
          Rest rooms for the staff.
 3. Aseptic or restricted area
    This area should be restricted to the working team.
    Staff working in this area should change into theatre clothes, should wear masks and
     gowns, and, where necessary, should wear sterile gloves
This area includes:
  The operating theatre;
  A scrub-up area;
  The sterile preparation room (preparation of sterile surgical instruments and equipment)
DEPARTMENTAL LAYOUT
                                             lxxxviii
1. Reception area- this the first part of theatre in which the patient come in contact with. The
   area must create pleasant impression in order to allay anxiety. The area should be large
   enough in order to allow patient to be transferred from ward stretcher to theatre stretcher
   Facilities such as telephones and tables for reception staff should be included. Patient are
   admitted to theatre via this area and checking of various requirement for patient is done.
2. Holding area-it is a special area inside or adjacent to surgical room. It should be located
   near reception area. Final identification and assessment before patient is transferred into
   the operating room. Minor procedures can also be performed i.e inserting catheters, i.v
   lines. It serves as admission, observation and discharge area.
3. Scrub room- it is where scrubbing is done to avoid splashing of water which may
   contaminate the operating room
4. Operating room- It’s a unique acute setting removed from other clinical units. It is
   controlled geographically, bacteriologically and environmentally. It is restricted in terms
   of inflow and outflow of personnel. Several methods have been used to prevent
   transmission of infections i.e Dust collecting surfaces i.e open shelves are made of
   materials that are resistant to corroding of strong disinfectants. Temperatures are controlled
   at a range of 20-24 and humidity at 30%-60%. Communication system provides a means
   of delivery of routine and emergency messages.
5. Anaesthetic room-Should be large enough to accommodate patient trolley, anaesthetic
machine and staff movement. Lockable cupboards should be used to accommodate scheduled
and controlled drugs, Piped o2, nitrous oxide should be incorporated in the design
6. Recovery room/ post anaesthetic care unit (PACU)- the goal is to provide total care to
   postoperative patient. Staff must be vigilant have knowledge on post-operative and post-
   anaesthesia complications, resuscitation equipment must be available, general lighting,
   ventilation and must be efficient. Hand washing facilities are essential
7. Theatre changing room- this is where surgeons nurses and theatre staff change into theatre
   gowns
8. Packing area- instruments are packed according to their specification ready for sterilization
9. Stores- linens, stationeries and theatre supplies are kept
10. Utility/sluice room- cleaning of equipment is done and sorting of soiled gowns,
11. Lounge- located outside operating room. this where surgeons, nursing staff ,anaesthetist
   and students go to rest after the procedure

                                           lxxxix
12. Sterilization room(CSSD)




                               xc
Laminar flow in Operation Theatre
Laminar airflow is a high-pressure, unidirectional air-moving diffuser housed in a cluster in a
wall or ceiling enclosure. It is designed to flow uninterrupted from the cleanest area to the less
clean area into air return grilles in the lower sidewalls. Cool air from the laminar diffuser travels
more quickly than isothermic air. Care is taken to continually monitor the patient’s temperature
for any hypothermic effect. Hypothermia can support the development of a surgical site
infection (SSI).

The airflow is divided into tiny linear columns of cool clean air that generates little velocity and
blowing as it courses toward the sterile field. Objects that emit thermal plume, such as spotlights,
persons, or equipment, cause the air currents to move in a different direction. Horizontal airflow
passes from the wall diffuser to an opposite lower return grille. Objects in the air pathway shed
particulate into the clean airstream.

Vertical airflowstyles have fewer obstacles to the line of direction of the air. Vertical downward
airflow is designed to flow from the top of the room, over the patient, lights, and equipment, and
continue downward forming a canopy toward the lower corners of the room where the air return
grilles are located. Studies have shown an 89% reduction in colony-forming units when vertical
laminar air flow is used appropriately. This includes making sure that the open instrument tables
are well within the confines of the airflow canopy. One additional consideration is when the
surgeon and team are directly over the patient to view the surgical site. Particulate from the
nonsterile head/cap/mask and neck are passed directly into the sterile field depositing cells into
the patient.

Obstacles to Laminar Airflow Effectiveness

Objects that pass between the flow of clean air and the sterile field around the patient shed
particles that can contaminate the surgical site. Heat emanating and rising from the team
members, the patient, and equipment referred to as thermal plume changes the course of the
laminar flow. Several physical barriers and events that interrupt airflow and return include the
following:

    Spotlights over the field
    Ceiling booms with surgical machinery and equipment
    Mayo stands over the patient

                                               xci
    Microscopes, articulated laser arm, and C-arm
     Personnel and patient thermal plume
    Opening and closing the OR door (sliding and swinging doors; proportionately higher with
     swinging doors)
Laminar airflow was first trialed during hip replacement surgery by Sir John Charnley in Great
Britain in the 1950s. Charnley believed that if particulate could be removed from the air, the 7%
infection rate could drop. His studies showed that the infection rate did fall to less than 2%.
Although the laminar system contributes to removing particulates, the improvements in sterile
technique and appropriate antibiotic therapy overall may have a larger effect on infection rate.
Research has shown that the particulate dispersal is proportionate to the number of personnel in
the room, the opening and closing of doors (and their type), placement of instrument tables, and
attire worn.




                                             xcii
                                 1.2.1.4 Learning Activities
                                 93      1.2.1.4.1 Case study
The COVID-19 pandemic has infected more than 13 million people worldwide. Among these,
an estimated 570,000 healthcare workers have been infected worldwide and approximately 600
in Kenya. Healthcare workers have been the main frontliners in combating the corona virus and
therefore require the utmost protection. With the numbers of patients with the virus being on the
rise, so are the number of operative cases with coronavirus.
          a) What are the standard precautions used by theater staff to protect themselves from
              corona virus?
          b) What is the correct sequence for donning PPE?
          c) What is the correct sequence for doffing PPE?

                     94    1.2.1.4.2 Field Visit to Operating Theatre
Objectives of the visit
 1. Decontaminate instruments after a surgical procedure
 2. Prepare and pack instruments for steam sterilization
                                 1.2.1.5 Self-Assessment
You are provided with the following questions for self -assessment, attempt them and
check your responses
 1. What are the three types of gloves (3) found in theater?
 2. What are three methods of sterilization?
 3. What steps should be followed before assembling instruments for sterilization?
 4. What are characteristics of an ideal packaging material for sterilizing instruments?
 5. What is the purpose of proper waste management?
 6. What are the two main types of laminar flow used in theatre?
 7. What areas are found in the semi-restricted area in theatre?
 8. What are five types of scissors found in theatre?

                     1.2.1.6 Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials
            Functional OR
            Sterile surgical gloves
            Packaging material for sterilization
            Decontaminant
            Surgical mask
            Surgical caps
            Theatre scrub gown
            Surgical boots
            Posters on wearing and removal of PPE
            Running water
            Hand washing soap
                                             xciii
           Hand towels

                                  1.2.1.7 References
Ministry of Health (2015). An Orientation Guide for Health Workers in Health Care Waste
Management. Nairobi

Phillips, N. F., & Berry, E. C. (2013). Berry & Kohn's operating room technique. 12th ed. St.
Louis, Mo.: Elsevier.

World                    Health                   Organization                            (2020).
https://www.who.int/medical_devices/priority/COVID_19_PPE/en/

                                       RESPONSES
 1.     What are the three types of gloves (3) found in theater?
           Sterile surgical gloves
           Clean gloves
           Heavy duty gloves
 2.     What are three methods of sterilization?
           Thermal
           Chemical
               Radiation (physical)
 3.     What steps should be followed before assembling instruments for sterilization?
           Instruments belonging to each set must have passed through terminal cleaning
                and terminal sterilization before they are safe to handle.
               Unless contraindicated, place an absorbent towel or foam in the bottom of the
                tray to absorb condensate, as for a rigid container with vacuum valves. Include
                a biologic indicator or chemical integrator in the tray.
               Count instruments as they are placed in the tray, and record the number of
                each type.
               Arrange the instruments in a definite pattern to protect them from damage and
                to facilitate their removal for counting and use. Follow the instrument book or
                other listing of instruments to be included.
               Place heavy instruments, such as retractors, in the bottom of the tray.
               Open the hinges and box locks on all hinged instruments.
               Place sharp and delicate instruments on top of other instruments. They can be
                separated with an absorbent material or left in a sterilizing rack with the

                                             xciv
                blades and tips suspended. The blades of scissors, other cutting edges, and
                delicate tips should not touch other instruments.
               Place concave or cupped instruments with the cupped surfaces down so that
                water condensate does not collect in them during steam sterilization and
                drying.
               Disassemble all detachable parts. Some parts, such as screws and springs, can
                be put in a peel pouch that is left open. Sealed pouches may not process
                correctly during the sterilization process.
               Separate dissimilar metals. For example, brass knife handles and malleable
                retractors should be separated from stainless steel instruments. Preferably, put
                each metal in a separate tray, or separate metals with absorbent material.
               Place instruments with a lumen, such as a suction tip, in as near a horizontal
                position as possible. These instruments should be tilted as little as possible to
                prevent trapped air or the pooling of water condensate.
               Distribute weight as evenly as possible in the tray. Some trays have dividers,
                clips, and pins that attach to the bottom, which help prevent instruments from
                shifting and keep them in alignment.
               Wrap the tray, or place it in a rigid container. Check woven textile wrappers
                for holes or abrasion. Sequentially double wrap in a woven or nonwoven
                material, or use a double thickness wrap in a single-fold configuration.
               Place a chemical indicator tab or tape on the outside wrapper or container for
                proof that the package has been through the parameters necessary for
                sterilization.
                Label the sets appropriately with their intended use (e.g., basic set), the date
                sterilized, and the process lot control number.
4.       What are characteristics of an ideal packaging material for sterilizing instruments?
        Permit penetration of the sterilizing agent to achieve sterilization of all items in the
         package.
        Allow the release of the sterilizing agent at the end of the exposure period and allow
         adequate drying or aerating.
        Withstand the physical conditions of the sterilizing process.


                                               xcv
        Maintain integrity of the package at varying atmospheric and humidity levels. In dry
         climates or at high altitudes, some packaging materials are susceptible to rupture
         during sterilization or dry out and crack in storage.
        Provide an impermeable barrier to microorganisms, dust particles, and moisture after
         sterilization. Items must remain sterile from the time they are removed from the
         sterilizer until they are used.
        Cover items completely and easily and fasten securely with adhesive strip or a heat
         seal that cannot be resealed after opening.
5.   What is the purpose of proper waste management?
    Protect people who handle waste items from accidental injury
    Prevent the spread of infection to patients, clients, and HCWs
    Prevent the spread of infection to the local community
    Safely dispose of hazardous materials
6. What are the two main types of laminar flow used in theatre?

            Horizontal airflow- passes from the wall diffuser to an opposite lower return grille
            Vertical downward airflow - designed to flow from the top of the room, over the
             patient, lights, and equipment, and continue downward forming a canopy toward
             the lower corners of the room where the air return grilles are located
7.   What areas are found in the semi-restricted area in theatre?
    The sterile supplies store;
    An anesthetic room;
    A recovery area (PACU);
    A clean corridor;
    Rest rooms for the staff.


8.   What are five types of scissors found in theatre?
        Sutures scissors-Used to cut sutures and supplies. have blunt points to avoid
             cutting structures near the suture
            Tissue /dissecting scissors-Most have sharp blades .curved or angled blade are
             needed
            mayo scissors- they are curved used to cut heavy tissues
            Metzbaum(metz)- used to cut delicate tissues
                                              xcvi
   Wire scissors- have short heavy blades. They are used to cut stainless steel sutures
   Dressing/bandage scissors- used to cut drains, dressing.




                                    xcvii
                              95      1.2.2 Learning Outcome 2
Participate in preparation of patient for surgery
  1.2.2.1 Introduction to the learning outcome
This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to prepare patient for
surgery. It includes:
    Identification and preparation of patient for surgery
    Patient positions
    Prepping and draping the patient
    Operation Theatre Ethics
    Maintaining Operation Theatre records
  1.2.2.2 Performance Standard
  Patient is identified according to patient theatre checklist, file and identification band
    Patient is positioned on operation table according to procedure to be done
    Patient is prepped according to WHO standards
    PT records are maintained as per work place policy
  1.2.2.3 Information Sheet
Identification and preparation of patient for surgery
Regardless of the physical setting in which an invasive or surgical procedure will be performed,
each patient should be adequately assessed and prepared so that the effects and potential risks
of the surgical intervention are minimized. This involves both physical and emotional
preparation. Perioperative caregivers should establish a baseline for the patient’s preoperative
condition so that changes occurring during the perioperative/perianesthesia care period can be
easily recognized.
Preoperative Preparation of All Patients
Specific activities such as the preoperative history and physical examination are completed and
documented before the patient arrives in the OR. This process can be performed before
admission to the hospital or ambulatory care facility; other activities are performed when the
patient arrives in the preadmission testing (PAT) area. The preoperative physical preparation is
designed to help all patients overcome the stresses of anesthesia, pain, fluid and blood loss,
immobilization, and tissue trauma. Preparation often begins before the patient’s hospital
admission, with the institution of nutritional or drug therapy.
Preadmission Procedures
Some preoperative preparations can be performed in the surgeon’s office. Patients are then
referred to the preoperative testing center of the hospital or ambulatory care facility. Tests and
                                             xcviii
records should be completed and available before the patient is admitted the day of the surgical
procedure. Preadmission tests (PATs) are scheduled according to the guidelines of each facility.
Some tests are acceptable only for a 30-day period or are repeated before admission. The type
of testing performed depends on the patient’s known or suspected condition and the complexity
of the surgical procedure. The preoperative preparations include:
 1. Medical history and physical examination.
Allergies and sensitivities should be noted. The preoperative technician establishes the baseline
for the patient’s vital signs




 2. Laboratory tests. Testing should be based on specific clinical indicators or risk factors that
     could affect surgical management or anesthesia. Tests include age, sex, preexisting disease,
     magnitude of surgical procedure, and type of anesthesia. Ideally these tests should be
     completed 24 hours before admission so the results are available for review. Some facilities
     perform laboratory studies the morning of the procedure.
    Hemoglobin, hematocrit, blood urea nitrogen (BUN),and blood glucose may be routinely
     tested for patients who are age 60 or older.
    Hematocrit is usually ordered for women of all ages before the administration of a general
     anesthetic.
    Complete blood count and blood chemistry profile may be indicated. Differential, platelet
     count, activated partial thromboplastin time, and prothrombin time tests also may be
     ordered.
                                             xcix
   Urinalysis may be indicated by the type of surgical procedure, medical history, and/or
    physical examination.
3. Blood type and crossmatch. If a transfusion is anticipated, the patient’s blood is typed and
    crossmatched. Many patients prefer to have their own blood drawn and stored for
    autotransfusion. Patients should be advised that blood banks charge an additional fee to
    store and preserve autologous blood for personal use. Even if the patient is to have an
    autotransfusion, his or her blood should still be typed and crossmatched in the event that
    additional transfusions are needed. If the patient refuses to accept blood transfusions, the
    appropriate documentation of refusal should be completed according to the policies and
    procedures of the facility.
4. Chest x-ray. A preoperative chest x-ray study is not routinely required for all patients. It
    may be required by facility policy or medically indicated as an adjunct to the clinical
    evaluation of patients with cardiac or pulmonary disease and for smokers, patients age 60
    years or older, and cancer patients.




5. Electrocardiogram (ECG). If the patient has known or suspected cardiac disease, an ECG
    is mandatory. Depending on the policy of the facility, an ECG may be routine for patients
    ages 40 years or older.




                                             c
6. Diagnostic procedures. Special diagnostic procedures are performed when specifically
   indicated (e.g., Doppler studies for vascular surgery).
7. Written instructions. The patient should receive written preoperative instructions to follow
   before admission for the surgical procedure. The written literature should be written with
   the patient’s literacy level in mind. Additional methods of instruction should be made
   available for patients with special needs. Do not use abbreviations or acronyms because
   they can be confused and misunderstood. Web-based videos can be helpful for patients
   who cannot read. These instructions should be reviewed with the patient in the surgeon’s
   office or in the preoperative testing center.




                                             ci
8. To prevent regurgitation or emesis and aspiration of gastric contents, the patient should not
   ingest solid foods before the surgical procedure. These instructions are usually stated as
   NPO after midnight. Solid foods empty from the stomach after changing to a liquid state,
   which may take up to 12 hours. Clear fluids may be unrestricted until 2 to 3 hours before
   the surgical procedure, but only at the discretion of the surgeon or anesthesia provider in
   selected patients. NPO time usually is reduced for infants, small children, patients with
   diabetes, and older adults prone to dehydration.
9. The physician may want the patient to take any essential oral medications that he or she
   normally takes. These can be taken as prescribed with a minimal fluid intake (a few sips of
   water) up to 1 hour before the surgical procedure.
10. The skin should be cleansed to prepare the surgical site. Many surgeons want patients to
   clean the surgical area with an antimicrobial soap preoperatively or have the patient shower
   with an antimicrobial sponge, commonly chlorhexidine, the morning of surgery. Patients
   should be told not to allow the soap to get in the eyes or ears. Chlorhexidine preparations
                                             cii
     can harm the corneas and tympanic membranes. Patients who will undergo a surgical
     procedure on the face, ear, or neck are advised to shampoo their hair before admission,
     because this may not be permitted again for a few days or weeks after the procedure. Nail
     polish and acrylic nails should be removed to permit observation of and access to the
     nailbed during the surgical procedure. The patient should be advised to uncover at least
     one fingernail if the anesthesia provider will use these monitoring devices during the
     procedure. Either the finger or toe can be used when a digit is desired, but the finger is
     usually more accessible. Some sensors are adhesive and can be placed on an earlobe or
     across the bridge of the nose. The nailbed is a vascular area, and the color of the nailbed is
     one indicator of peripheral oxygenation and circulation. The Oxisensor (optode) of a pulse
     oximeter may be attached to the nailbed to monitor oxygen saturation and pulse rate.




A finger cuff may be used for continuous blood pressure monitoring. Nail polish or acrylic nails
inhibit contact between these devices and the vascular bed.
 11. Jewelry and valuables should be left at home to ensure safekeeping. If electrosurgery will
     be used, patients should be informed that all metal jewelry, including wedding bands and
     religious artifacts, should be removed to prevent possible burns. Loss prevention is a
     consideration as well.
 12. Patients should be given other special instructions about what is expected, such as when to
     arrive at the surgical facility. A responsible adult should be available to take the patient
     home if the procedure, medication, or anesthetic agent renders the patient incapable of
     driving. Family members or significant others should know where to wait and where the
     patient will be taken after the surgical procedure.
 13. Informed consent. The physician should obtain informed consent from the patient or legal
     designee. After explaining the surgical procedure and its risks, benefits, and alternatives,
     the surgeon should document the process and have the patient sign the consent form. This
                                              ciii
   documentation becomes part of the permanent record and accompanies the patient to the
   OR. Policy and state laws dictate the parameters for ascertaining an informed consent.




14. Anesthesia assessment. An anesthesia history and physical assessment are performed
   before a general or regional anesthetic is administered. The history may be obtained by the
   surgeon, and/or the patient may be asked to complete a questionnaire for the anesthesia
   provider in the surgeon’s office or in the preoperative testing center. An interview by an
   anesthesia provider may be conducted before admission if the patient has a complex
                                           civ
     medical history, is high risk, or has a high degree of anxiety. All patients should understand
     the risks of and alternatives to the type of anesthetic to be administered. After discussion
     with the anesthesia provider, the patient should sign an anesthesia consent form.
Patient positions
Positioning for a surgical procedure is important to the patient’s outcome. Proper positioning
facilitates preoperative skin preparation and appropriate draping with sterile drapes. Positioning
requires a detailed knowledge of anatomy and physiologic principles and familiarity with the
necessary equipment. Safety is a prime consideration. Patient position and skin preparation are
determined by the procedure to be performed, with consideration given to the surgeon’s choice
of surgical approach and the technique of anesthetic administration. Factors such as age, height,
weight, cardiopulmonary status, and preexisting disease condition (e.g., arthritis, allergies) also
should be incorporated into the plan of care. Preoperatively, the patient should be assessed for
alterations in skin integrity, for joint mobility, and for the presence of joint or vascular
prostheses. The expected outcome is that the patient will not be harmed by positioning, prepping,
or draping for the surgical procedure. Efficiency of the patient preparation process can be
attained by organizing activities in a logical sequence. The main objectives for any surgical or
procedural positioning are as follows:
        Optimize surgical-site exposure for the surgeon.
        Minimize the risk for adverse physiologic effects.
        Facilitate physiologic monitoring by the anesthesia provider.
        Promote safety and security for the patient.
 Responsibility for Patient Positioning
The selection of the surgical position is made by the surgeon in consultation with the anesthesia
provider. Adjustments are made as necessary for the administration and monitoring of anesthetic
and for maintenance of the patient’s physiologic status. The theatre technologist may be
responsible for placing the patient in a surgical position, with guidance from the anesthesia
provider and the surgeon. In essence, patient positioning is a shared responsibility among all
team members. The anesthesia provider has the final word on positioning when the patient’s
physiologic status and monitoring are in question. In cases of complex positioning or positioning
patients who are obese, the plan of care includes the need for additional help in lifting or
positioning. Special devices or positioning aids may be necessary. The weight tolerance of the
mechanism and balance of the OR bed is critical. Manufacturer recommendations should be

                                               cv
consulted for guidance in selecting the appropriate bed. To avoid questions or confusion, the
weight tolerance should be clearly labeled on every OR bed.


Timing of Patient Positioning and Anesthetic Administration
Moving the patient from the transport cart to the OR bed or vice versa requires that both surfaces
are securely locked and stable. Someone should be stationed on the far side of the receiving
surface to prevent the patient from tumbling off the edge. For any patient under the influence of
an anesthetic agent or narcotic medication, personnel should be at the head, foot, and both sides
of the patient to prevent dependent parts from sliding off the table. The neck of the patient’s
gown should be untied to prevent entanglement and choking as the patient moves or is moved
from one surface to another. After transfer from the transport cart to the OR bed, the patient is
usually supine (face up on the back). Privacy is maintained with a warm cotton blanket, and the
thigh strap is positioned in clear sight of the entire team. The patient may be anesthetized in a
supine position and then repositioned for the surgical procedure. Some patients are positioned
and then anesthetized if their physiologic status requires special care. If patients undergo a
procedure in a prone position and with general anesthesia, they are anesthetized and intubated
on the transport cart. A minimum of four people is required to place the patient safely in the
prone position on the OR bed. Commonly, more personnel are needed for a safe transfer between
surfaces when the patient is fully under anesthesia and intubated. Several factors influence the
time at which the patient is positioned:
    the site of the surgical procedure;
    the age and size of the patient;
    the technique of anesthetic administration;
    whether the patient is conscious and in pain while moving. The patient is not moved,
     positioned, or prepped until the anesthesia provider indicates it is safe to do so.
Preparations for Positioning
Before the patient is brought into the OR, theatre technologist should do the following:
  Review the proposed position by referring to the procedure book and the surgeon’s
     preference in comparison with the scheduled procedure.
  Ask the surgeon for assistance if unsure how to position the patient.
  Assess for any patient-specific positioning and padding needs.
  Check the working parts of the OR bed before bringing the patient into the room.


                                               cvi
 Assemble and test all table attachments and protective pads anticipated for the surgical
   procedure and have them immediately available for use.
 Review the plan of care for unique needs of the patient.
Safety Measures
Safety measures, including the following, are observed while transferring, moving, and
positioning patients:
1. The patient is properly identified before being transferred to the OR bed, and the surgical
   site is confirmed according to facility policy. The surgeon is required to initial the correct
   site.
2. The patient is assessed for mobility status, which includes determination of the patient’s
   ability to transfer between the transport cart and the OR bed. Do not plan to have patients
   move themselves toward an affected limb or toward the blinded eye.
3. The OR bed and transport vehicle are securely locked in position, with the mattress
   stabilized during transfer to and from the OR bed. Untie the ties of the patient’s gown, and
   take care not to allow the patient’s gown or blanket to become lodged between the two
   surfaces or under the bottom of a moving patient. Velcro strips or other means should be
   used to maintain the stability of the mattresses of the two surfaces.
4. Two people should assist an awake patient with the transfer by positioning themselves on
   each side of the patient’s transfer path. The person on the side of the transport cart assists
   the patient in moving toward the OR bed. The person on the opposite side prevents the
   patient from falling over the edge of the OR bed.
5. Adequate assistance in lifting unconscious, anesthetized, obese, or weak patients is
   necessary to prevent injury. A minimum of four people is recommended, and transfer
   devices and lifters may be used. The patient is moved on the count of three, with the
   anesthesia provider giving the signal count. Sliding or pulling the patient may cause dermal
   abrasion or injury to soft tissues. Dependent limbs can create a counterbalance and cause
   the patient to fall to the floor. Examination gloves should be worn if the patient is
   incontinent or offers other risk of exposure to blood and body substances.
Anatomic and Physiologic Considerations
A patient’s tolerance of the stresses of the surgical procedure depends greatly on normal
functioning of the vital systems. The patient’s physical condition is considered, and proper
body alignment is important. Criteria are met for physiologic positioning to prevent injury from


                                            cvii
pressure, crushing, pinching, obstruction, and stretching. Each body system is considered when
planning the patient’s position for the surgical procedure.
Respiratory Considerations
Unhindered diaphragmatic movement and a patent airway are essential for maintaining
respiratory function, preventing hypoxia, and facilitating induction by inhalation anesthesia.
Chest excursion is a concern because inspiration expands the chest anteriorly. Some positions
limit the amount of mechanical excursion of the chest. Some hypoxia is always present in a
horizontal position because the anteroposterior diameter of the ribcage and abdomen
decreases.The tidal volume, the functional residual capacity of air moved by a single breath, is
reduced by as much as one third when a patient lies down because the diaphragm shifts
cephalad. Therefore there should be no constriction around the chest or neck. The patient’s
arms should be at his or her side, on armboards, or otherwise supported not crossed on the
chest, unless absolutely necessary for the procedure. Patients have additional respiratory
compromise if they are obese, smoke, or have pulmonary disease.
Circulatory Considerations
Adequate arterial circulation is necessary for maintaining blood pressure, perfusing tissues
with oxygen, facilitating venous return, and preventing thrombus formation. Occlusion and
pressure on the peripheral blood vessels are avoided. Body support and restraining straps must
not be fastened too tightly. Anesthetic agents alter normal body circulatory mechanisms, such
as blood pressure. Some drugs cause constriction or dilation of the blood
vessels, which is further complicated by positioning.
Peripheral Nerve Considerations
Prolonged pressure on or stretching of the peripheral nerves can result in injuries that range
from sensory and motor loss to paralysis and muscle wasting. The extremities, and the body,
should be well supported at all times. The most common sites of injury in the upper body are
the divisions of the brachial plexus and the ulnar, radial, peroneal, and facial nerves; the axons
may be stretched or disrupted. Extreme positions of the head and arm greater than 90 degrees
can easily injure the brachial plexus and other superficial nerves. Peripheral nerve injury of the
lower body can involve the sciatic, ilioinguinal, and peroneal nerves. If the patient is
improperly positioned, the ulnar, radial, and peroneal nerves may be compressed against bone,
stirrups, upright retractor posts, or the OR bed.
Musculoskeletal Considerations


                                             cviii
A strain on muscle groups results in injury or needless postoperative discomfort. A patient who
is anesthetized lacks protective muscle tone. If the head is extended for a prolonged time, the
patient may have more pain from the resulting stiff neck than from the surgical wound. Care
is taken not to hyperextend a joint, which not only causes postoperative pain but also may
contribute to permanent injury to an extremity. Elderly or debilitated patients with osteoporosis
or other bone disease may suffer fractures. When turning a patient, always keep the spine in
alignment by grasping the shoulder girdle and hip in a logrolling fashion. Do
not turn or elevate a patient by grasping only a hip or shoulder and twisting the spine. Proper
body alignment is maintained.
Soft Tissue Considerations
Body weight is distributed unevenly when the patient lies on the OR bed. Weight that is
concentrated over bony prominences can cause skin pressure ulcers and deep tissue injury.
These areas should be protected from constant external pressure against hard surfaces,
particularly in patients who are thin or underweight. In addition, tissue that is subjected to
prolonged mechanical pressure (e.g., a fold in the skin under an obese or malnourished patient)
is not adequately perfused. Wrinkled sheets and the edges of a positioning or other device
under the patient can cause pressure on the skin. Foam pads are not adequate to relieve pressure
because they compress and do not alternate pressure. Towels and sheet rolls do not relieve
pressure because they are unyielding to the patient’s body weight. Gel pads
are preferred.
Complications caused by positioning
 Hemodynamic instability from orthostatic position
   Poor ventilation from thoracic compression
   Peripheral nerve injury from compression or stretch
   Tissue damage from crush or shearing force
   Ischemia of hair-bearing scalp, which causes bald spots
   Compartment syndrome
   Pressure necrosis
   Digit amputation in table bends
   Blindness from optic nerve ischemia
   Corneal abrasion
   Ischemic limbs from arterial occlusion

                                             cix
    Venous emboli
    Vertebral injury
    Panic attacks and feelings of claustrophobia in awake patient


Surgical Positions
Supine (Dorsal) Position
The patient lies flat on the back with the arms secured at the sides with the lift sheet; the
palms extend along the side of the body in their natural resting position. The elbows may be
protected with padded plastic sleds. The legs are straight and parallel and are in line with the
head and spine; the hips are parallel with the spine. A safety belt is placed across the thighs 2
inches above the knees. Small positioning pads may be placed under the head and popliteal area
to relieve pressure on the spine as needed. The heels are protected from pressure with a pillow,
gel pad, or donut. The feet must not be in prolonged plantar flexion or nerve stretch injury could
result. To prevent footdrop, the soles may be supported by a pillow or padded footboard. The
supine position is used for procedures on the anterior surface of the body, such as abdominal,
abdominothoracic, and some lower extremity procedures.




Trendelenburg’s Position
With Trendelenburg’s position, patients lie on their back in the supine position with the knees
over the lower break of the OR bed. The knees must bend with the break of the OR


                                               cx
bed to prevent pressure on the peroneal nerves and veins in the legs. The thigh strap is positioned
2 inches above the knees over the blanket. The entire OR bed is tilted approximately 30 to 45
degrees downward at the head, depending on the surgeon’s preference. The foot of the OR bed
is lowered to the desired angle to help counterbalance the patient’s body weight.
Trendelenburg’s position is used for procedures in the lower abdomen or pelvis when shifting
the abdominal viscera cephalad away from the pelvic area for better exposure. Although surgical
accessibility is increased, lung volume is decreased and the heart is mechanically compressed
by the pressure of the organs against the diaphragm. Intracranial and intraocular pressure is
increased. Therefore the patient remains in this position for as short a time as possible. When
returning the patient to a horizontal position, the leg section should be raised first and slowly
while venous stasis in
the legs is reversed. The entire OR bed is then leveled.




Reverse Trendelenburg’s Position
With reverse Trendelenburg’s position, patients lie on their back in the supine position. The
entire OR bed is tilted 30º to 40º so the head is higher than the feet; a padded footboard is used
to prevent the patient from sliding toward the tilt. The thigh safety belt is positioned 2 inches
above the knees over the blanket. Small pillows may be placed under the knees. A small pillow
or donut is used to stabilize the head. This position is used for thyroidectomy to facilitate
breathing and to decrease blood supply to the surgical site (blood pools caudally). It is also used
for laparoscopic gallbladder, biliary tract, and stomach procedures to allow the abdominal
viscera to fall away from the epigastrium, providing access to the upper abdomen. Venous stasis
can cause complications, and prevention of deep vein thrombosis is an important consideration.
The use of sequential compression devices, antiembolic stockings, or foot pumps is suggested
to improve venous return.
                                               cxi
Semi-Fowler’s Position
With semi-Fowler’s position, the patient is supine with the buttocks at the flex in the OR bed
and the knees over the lower break. The foot of the OR bed is lowered slightly, flexing the knees.
The body section is raised 45 degrees and thereby becomes the backrest. Arms may rest on
armboards parallel to the OR bed or on a large soft pillow on the lap. Care is taken that the arms
do not fall dependent from the body during the procedure. The safety belt is secured 2 inches
above the knees over the blanket. The entire OR bed is tilted slightly with the head end
downward to prevent the patient from slipping toward the foot of the OR bed. Feet should rest
on the padded footboard to prevent footdrop. For cranial procedures, the head is supported in a
headrest. In this position, the OR bed looks like a modified armchair. This position may be used
for shoulder, nasopharyngeal, facial,and breast reconstruction procedures. Complications of this
position include air embolus into the venous system, pelvic pooling or venous stasis,
hypotension, positional orthopedic injury, and tissue pressure injury and necrosis.




Sitting Position
With the sitting position, the patient is placed in the Fowler’s position except that the torso is
completely in an upright position.


Lithotomy Position
The lithotomy position is used for perineal, vaginal, urologic, and rectal procedures. The
patient’s buttocks rest along the break between the body and the leg sections of the OR bed. A
padded metal footboard is used as an OR bed extension so the patient’s legs do not extend over
the foot of the OR bed before the legs are placed in the upright position.
Stirrups are secured in sockets on each side of the OR bed rail at the level of the patient’s upper
thighs. They are adjusted at equal height on both sides and at an appropriate height for the length
of the patient’s legs to maintain symmetry when the patient is positioned. After the patient is
anesthetized, the safety belt is removed and the patient’s legs are raised simultaneously by two

                                              cxii
people. The safety belt should not remain in place over the abdomen with the patient in the
lithotomy position. It causes increased abdominal venous pressure, which in turn increases the
risk for blood loss. Each person grasps the sole of a foot in one hand and supports the calf at the
knee area with the other. The knees are flexed, and the legs and feet are placed inside the stirrups.
Avoid overflexing the hip toward the abdomen to prevent ilioinguinal nerve compression. For
sling or candy cane stirrups, the feet are placed in the fabric slings of the stirrups at a 90-degree
angle to the abdomen. One padded loop encircles the sole; the other padded loop goes around
the ankle.




Prone Position
Prone position is used for all procedures with a dorsal or posterior approach. When the prone
position is used, the patient is anesthetized and intubated in the supine position on
the locked transport cart. The patient’s arms are along his or her sides. When the anesthesia
provider gives permission, the patient is slowly and cautiously shifted toward the OR bed in the
supine position and then turned onto the abdomen onto the OR bed. The patient’s body is rotated
as if rolling a log; a team of at least four to six people is needed to maintain body alignment
during this transfer. The anesthesia provider calls the count. The anesthesia provider controls

                                               cxiii
the patient’s head and airway while the rest of the patient’s body is moved by the team. Chest
rolls or bolsters under the axillae and along the sides of the chest from the clavicles to the iliac
crests raise the weight of the body from the abdomen and thorax. The weight of the abdomen
falls away from the diaphragm and keeps pressure off the vena cava and abdominal aorta. This
facilitates respiration,
although vital capacity and cardiac index are reduced. To ensure cardiac filling and to reduce
hypotension, venous return from the femoral veins and inferior vena cava is uninterrupted.
Female breasts should be moved laterally to reduce pressure on them. Male genitalia should be
free from pressure. Pendulous skinfolds should not be crimped under the patient
in any manner.
The arms may lie supported along the sides of the body, with the palms up or inward toward the
body. An alternate position is to place the arms into a diver’s pose by lowering them toward
the floor and rotating (circumducting) them upward in a natural range of motion. Care is taken
not to dislocate the shoulders. The armboards are reversed on the table, pointing toward the
anesthesia provider. The elbows are padded and are slightly flexed no greater than 90º to prevent
overextension, and the palms are down. The arms may extend beyond the head, but not so far
as to cause brachial plexus compression or stretch. The head can be turned to one side or
positioned face down on a padded headrest to prevent pressure on the ear, eye, and face.
Clearance of the airway must be ensured. A serious complication of the prone position is
blindness caused by ischemia of the vascular system of the eye. A pillow or padding under the
anterior aspect of the ankles and the dorsa of the feet prevents pressure on the toes and elevates
the feet to aid venous return. Do not permit the patient’s toes to extend beyond the foot of the
bed. Donuts under the knees prevent pressure on the patellae. The safety belt is placed over the
calves to prevent flexion of the lower legs. Care is taken not to compress the lower legs. An
additional belt can be positioned over the posterior thighs as an added precaution.




                                              cxiv
Kraske (Jackknife) Position
With the Kraske position, the patient remains supine until anesthetized and is then turned onto
the abdomen (prone position) via rotation. The hips are positioned over the center break of the
OR
bed between the body and leg sections. Chest rolls or bolsters are placed to raise the chest if the
patient is under general anesthesia. A Kraske pillow can be placed at the level of the anterior
thighs to elevate the buttocks. The arms are extended on reverse angled armboards with the
elbows flexed and the palms down. The head is to the side and is supported on a donut or pillow.
The dorsa of the feet and toes rest on a pillow. The safety belt is placed below the knees. The
leg section of the OR bed is lowered the desired amount (usually about 90º), and the entire OR
bed is tilted head downward to elevate the hips above the rest of the body. The patient is well
balanced on the OR bed . For procedures in the rectal area (e.g., pilonidal sinus,
hemorrhoidectomy), the buttocks are retracted with wide tape strips. Because of the dependent
position, venous pooling occurs cephalad (toward the head) and caudad (toward the feet). It is
important to slowly return the patient to horizontal from this unnatural position to minimize
circulatory complications.




                                              cxv
Knee-Chest Position
For this position the patient kneels on the lower section; the knees are thus flexed at a right angle
to the body. The upper portion of the OR bed may be raised slightly to support the head, which
is turned to the side. The arms are placed around the head with the elbows flexed, and a large
soft pillow is placed beneath them. The chest rests on the OR bed, and the safety belt is placed
above the knees. The entire OR bed is tilted head downward so the hips and pelvis are at the
highest point a modified jackknife position.




Lateral Positions
For lateral positioning, the OR bed remains flat. The patient is anesthetized and intubated in the
supine position on the OR bed and then turned to the unaffected side. In the right lateral position,
the patient lies on the right side with the left side up (for a left-sided procedure); the left lateral
position exposes the right side. The patient is turned by no fewer than four people to maintain
body alignment and achieve stability. The patient’s back is drawn to the edge of the OR bed.
                                                cxvi
The knee of the lower leg is flexed slightly to provide stabilization, and the upper leg is flexed
to provide counterbalance. The flexed knees may require padding to prevent pressure and
shearing force. In addition, a large soft pillow is placed lengthwise between the legs to take
pressure off the upper hip and lower leg and therefore prevents circulatory complications and
pressure on the peroneal nerve. The ankle and foot of the upper leg should be supported to
prevent footdrop. Bony prominences are padded. For added stability, a safety belt or a 3-inch-
wide tape is placed over the hip. The patient’s arms may be placed on a padded double armboard,
with the lower arm palm up and the upper arm slightly flexed with the palm down. Blood
pressure should be measured from the lower arm. As an alternative, the upper arm can be
positioned on a padded Mayo stand. A water bag or pressure reduction pad under the axilla
protects neurovascular structures. The shoulders should be in alignment. The patient’s head is
in cervical alignment with the spine. The head should be supported on a small pillow between
the shoulder and neck to prevent stretching the neck and brachial plexus and to maintain a patent
airway.




Kidney position
The flank region is positioned over the kidney elevator on the OR bed when the patient is turned
onto the unaffected side. The short kidney rest is attached to the body elevator at the patient’s
back. The longer rest is placed in front at a level beneath the iliac crest to minimize pressure on
                                              cxvii
the abdominal organs. Both rests are well padded. In an obese patient, folds of abdominal tissue
may extend over the end of the anterior rest and be bruised if caution is not taken. The OR bed
is flexed slightly at the level of the iliac crest so the body elevator can be raised as desired to
increase space between the lower ribs and iliac crest. A body strap or wide adhesive tape is
placed over the hip to stabilize the patient after the OR bed is flexed and the elevator is raised.
The entire OR bed is tilted slightly downward toward the head until the surgical area is
horizontal; the upper shoulder and hip should be in a straight line. The upper arm is supported
in a double airplane-style armboard. A gel pad is used to support the chest and protect the
breasts. An axillary roll is placed to take body weight off the deltoid muscle in the shoulder.
Before closure, the OR bed is straightened to allow better approximation of tissues. The term
kidney position is used to designate the lateral flexion used to elevate the surgical site.
Documentation should clearly state either right or left to indicate which kidney is elevated for
the procedure. The kidney position is used for procedures on the kidney and ureter; this position
is not well tolerated. Skin and underlying tissue can be damaged by excessive pressure during
flexion of the OR bed. OR bed flexion combined with use of the kidney elevator may cause
cardiovascular responses. Blood tends to pool in the lower arm and leg. Circulation is further
compromised by increased pressure on the abdominal vessels when the kidney elevator is raised.
The spine is stressed in a lateral flexed position and
can cause strain on the vertebral structures.




Prepping and draping the patient

                                                cxviii
Urinary Catheterization
The patient should void to empty the urinary bladder just before transfer to the OR suite unless
the procedure requires the bladderto be full, such as for special bladder tone testing procedures.
If the patient’s bladder is not empty or the surgeon wishes to prevent bladder distention during
a long procedure or after the surgical procedure, urinary catheterization may be necessary after
the patient is anesthetized. An indwelling Foley catheter may be inserted by a member of the
team. This retention catheter maintains bladder decompression to avoid trauma during a lower
abdominal or pelvic procedure, to permit accurate measurement of output during or after the
surgical procedure, and to facilitate outputand healing after a surgical procedure on
genitourinary tract structures. Catheterization is performed after anesthesia is administered and
before the patient is positioned for the surgical procedure, except for a patient who will remain
in the lithotomy position.The Foley catheter should be inserted before the vaginal or abdominal
skin preparation to prevent perineal splash to the surgical site. The vagina can be prepped
immediately after the Foley catheter is placed. Gloves should be changed and a new prep set
used for the abdominal skin prep.




Principles of Patient Skin Preparation
The purpose of skin preparation is to render the surgical site as free as possible from transient
and resident microorganisms, dirt, and skin oil so that the incision can be made through the skin
with
minimal danger of infection from this source. Many surgeons prefer to have patients bathe with
antimicrobial soap the morning of the surgical procedure.The patient should be advised to avoid
the use of body emollients, oils, creams, and lotions after washing. Some products decrease the
efficacy of antimicrobial soap, and other products prevent adherence of the return electrode and
electrocardiographic (ECG) electrodes to the skin.
The perioperative theatre technologist should assess the patient’s skin before, during, and after
the prepping process. Documentation of the condition of the patient’s skin with notation of
lesions or other pertinent markings is important. Abnormal skin irritation, infection, or abrasion
on or near the surgical site might be a contraindication to the surgical procedure and is reported
to the surgeon. Some patients may have body piercing jewelry that is located on the face, tongue,
nose, lip, eyebrow, ears, or other easily identified places. In some cases, the piercing jewelry is

                                              cxix
located under clothing on the nipples, umbilicus, or genitalia. Body piercing jewelry should be
removed for safety reasons before surgery.
Skin Preparation for Specific Anatomic Areas
Head and Neck
Eye
1. The eyebrows are never shaved or removed unless the surgeon deems this essential. Eyebrows
do not grow back completely or evenly.
2. The eyelashes may be trimmed, if ordered by the surgeon, with fine iris scissors coated with
sterile water-soluble lubricant to catch the lashes.
3. The eyelids and periorbital areas are cleansed with a nonirritating antiseptic agent and then
rinsed with warm sterile water. The prep starts centrally and extends to the periphery (i.e., from
the center of the lid to the brow and cheek).
4. The conjunctival sac is flushed with a nontoxic agent, such as sterile normal saline
solution,with a bulb syringe. Some surgeons use a dilute iodophor solution (not the detergent or
alcohol form). The patient’s head is turned slightly to the affected side. The solution is contained
with sponges or an absorbent towel. Care must be taken to prevent prep solution from entering
the patient’s ears.
Ears, Face, and Nose
1. Skin surfaces should be cleansed at least to the hairline.
2. Cotton applicators are used for cleansing the nostrils and external ear canals.
3. Protect the eyes with a piece of sterile plastic sheeting. If the patient is awake, ask that the
eyes be kept closed during the prep. Cotton balls or nonradiopaque gauze should be placed in
the ears to prevent runoff. Cotton balls may leave small fibers in residual cerumen in the ear that
can cause irritation.
Neck
1. One sterile towel is folded under the edge of the blanket and gown, which are turned down
almost to the nipple line.
2. The area includes the neck laterally to the table line and up to the mandible, tops of the
shoulders, and chest almost to the nipple line.
3. For combined head and neck surgical procedures, include the face to the eyes; the shaved
areas of the head, ears, and posterior neck; and the area over the shoulders.
Chest and Trunk

                                                cxx
Lateral Thoracoabdominal Area
1. The gown is removed. The blanket is turned down well below the lower limit of the area to
be prepared. A towel is folded under the edge of the blanket.
2. The arm is held up during the prep.
3. Beginning at the site of incision, the area may include the axilla, chest, and abdomen from the
neck to the iliac crest. For a surgical procedure in the region of the kidney, it extends up to the
axilla and down to the pubis. The area also extends beyond midlines, anteriorly and posteriorly,
and may include the arm to the elbow .
Chest and Breast
1. The anesthesia provider turns the patient’s face toward the unaffected side.
2. One towel is folded under the blanket edge, just above the pubis. Another is placed on the OR
bed under the shoulder and side.
3. The arm on the affected side is held up by grasping the hand and raising the shoulder and
axilla slightly from the OR bed.
4. The area includes the shoulder, upper arm down to the elbow, axilla, and chest wall to the
table line and beyond the sternum to the opposite shoulder . Breast procedures generally require
both breasts to be prepped.
Shoulder
1. The anesthesia provider turns the patient’s face toward the opposite side.
2. A towel is placed under the shoulder and axilla.
3. The arm is held up by grasping the hand and elevating the shoulder slightly from the OR bed.
4. The area includes the circumference of the upper arm to below the elbow, from the base of
the neck over the shoulder, scapula,and chest to the midline.
Rectoperineal Area
1. With the patient in the lithotomy position, a moisture-proof pad is placed under the buttocks
and extends to the kick bucket that receives solutions and discarded prep sponges.
2. The area includes the pubis, external genitalia, perineum and anus, and inner aspects of the
thighs Begin the scrub over the pubic area, scrubbing downward over
the genitalia and perineum. Discard the sponge.
4. The inner aspects of the upper third of both thighs are scrubbed with separate sponges,
working from groin to distal aspect of thigh.
5. The anus is prepped last.

                                                cxxi
6. The rectoperineal area is prepped before the abdomen, using a separate prep set and gloves if
an abdominal approach is planned.
Vagina
1. Sponge forceps should be included on the preparation table for a vaginal prep because a
portion of the prep is done internally. A disposable vaginal prep tray, with sponge sticks
included, is
available.
2. With the patient in the lithotomy position, a moisture-proof pad is placed under the buttocks
and extends to the kick bucket that receives solutions and discarded prep sponges.
3. A towel is folded above the pubis.
4. Urinary catheterization is performed if indicated. Vaginal and anal flora should not be
permitted to enter the sterile environment of the urinary bladder.
5. The external area includes the pubis, vulva, labia, perineum, anus, and adjacent area, including
inner aspects of the upper third of the thighs .
6. Begin over the pubic area, scrubbing downward over the vulva and perineum. The inner
aspects of the thighs are scrubbed with separate sponges from the labia majora outward.
7. The vagina and cervix are cleansed with sponges on sponge forceps or disposable sponge
sticks. The cleansing agent should be applied generously in the vagina because vaginal mucosa
has many folds and crevices that are not easily cleansed.
8. After thorough cleansing of the vagina, wipe it out with a dry sponge to prevent the possibility
of the fluid entering the peritoneal cavity during the surgical procedure on pelvic organs.
9. The anus is prepped last to prevent intestinal florae from entering the vaginal vault.
Extremities.
1. A moisture-proof pad should be placed on the OR bed under an extremity to retain runoff
solution. This is removed after the prep so that the bed is dry under the surgical site. The
extremity is supported by personnel wearing sterile gloves and remains elevated until sterile
drapes are applied under and around the prepped area.
2. A full circumferential extremity prep may be done in two stages to provide adequate support
to joints and to ensure that all areas are scrubbed. It may include the foot for hip, thigh,
knee, and lower leg procedures.
3. Caution must be taken to prevent solution from pooling under a tourniquet. The padding
absorbs the solution and could cause tissue maceration. If a nonsterile pneumatic tourniquet is

                                              cxxii
used, it is positioned before the prep and protected with a sterile clear plastic drape. A towel
tucked around the tourniquet cuff absorbs excess solution. This is removed before the tourniquet
is inflated.
Upper Arm
1. A towel is placed under the shoulder and axilla.
2. The arm is held up by grasping the hand and elevating the shoulder slightly from the OR bed.
3. The area includes the entire circumference of the arm to the wrist, the axilla, and over the
shoulder and scapula.
Elbow and Forearm
 1. A towel is placed under the shoulder and axilla.
 2. The arm is held up by grasping the hand.
 3. The area includes the entire arm from the shoulder and axilla to and including the hand.
 Hand
 1. Towels may be omitted. The anatomy of the hand furnishes sufficient landmarks to define
 the area, and towels are apt to slip over the scrubbed area.
 2. The arm must be held up by a gloved person supporting it above
 the elbow so that the entire circumference can be scrubbed.
 3. The area includes the hand and arm to 3 inches (7.5 cm) above
 the elbow.
 Hip
 1. One towel is placed under the thigh on the OR bed. Another towel is placed on the abdomen
 and folded under the edge of the gown, just above the umbilicus.
 2. The leg on the affected side is held up by supporting it just below the knee.
 3. The area includes the abdomen on the affected side, the thigh to the knee, and the buttocks
 to the table line, the groin, and the pubis .
 Thigh
 1. One towel is placed under the thigh on the OR bed. Another towel is placed on the abdomen
 and folded under the edge of the gown, just below the umbilicus.
 2. The leg is held up by supporting the foot and ankle.
 3. The area includes the entire circumference of the thigh and leg to the ankle, over the hip and
 buttocks to the table line, the groin, and the pubis. Take care not to allow the solution to
 pool under the patient’s buttocks.

                                                 cxxiii
 Knee and Lower Leg
 1. A towel is placed over the groin.
 2. The leg is held up by supporting it at the foot.
 3. The area includes the entire circumference of the leg and extends from the foot to the upper
 part of the thigh.
 Ankle and Foot
 1. Towels are omitted.
 2. The foot is held up by supporting the leg at the knee. A legholder device is useful.
 Documentation
 Details of the preoperative skin condition and preparation should be documented in the
 patient’s intraoperative record. These should include, but are not limited to, the following:
         The condition of the skin around the surgical site and placement sites of the return
          electrodes
         Hair removal, if done, including the method and location, and areas for attachment of
          monitors or electrodes
         Antiseptic solutions, fat solvents, irrigating solutions, and any other agents used
         The skin area prepped and skin reaction, if any
         The name of the person who did the prep
Draping
Draping is the procedure of covering the patient and surrounding areas with a sterile barrier to
create and maintain an adequate sterile field. An effective barrier eliminates or minimizes
passage
of microorganisms between nonsterile and sterile areas. Criteria to be met in establishing an
effective barrier are that the material must be:
    Blood and fluid resistant to keep drapes dry and prevent migration of microorganisms.
     Material should be impermeable to moist microbial penetration (i.e., resistant to strike-
     through) and resistant to tearing, puncture, or abrasion that causes fiber breakdown and
     thus permits microbial penetration.
    Lint-free to reduce airborne contaminants and shedding into the surgical site. Cellulose and
     cotton fibers can cause granulomatous peritonitis or embolize arteries.
    Antistatic to eliminate risk of a spark from static electricity.


                                              cxxiv
     Sufficiently porous to eliminate heat buildup so as to maintain an isothermic environment
      appropriate for the patient’s body temperature.
     Drapable to fit around contours of the patient, furniture, and equipment.
     Dull and nonglaring to minimize color distortion from reflected light.
     Free of toxic ingredients, such as laundry residues and nonfast dyes.
Draping Materials
Self-Adhering Sheeting. Sterile, waterproof, antistatic, and transparent or translucent plastic
sheeting may be applied to dry skin.
Incise Drape. The entire clear plastic drape has an adhesive backing that is applied to skin. This
may be applied separately, or the sheeting may be incorporated into the drape sheet. The skin
incision is made through the plastic. Antimicrobial incise drapes have an antimicrobial agent
impregnated in the adhesive or the polymeric film. A film coated with an iodophor-containing
adhesive, for example, slowly releases active iodine during the surgical procedure to effectively
inhibit proliferation of organisms from the patient’s skin. The skin may be prepped with alcohol
and allowed to dry before the drape is applied. Time is a factor in microbial accumulation
from resident bacteria. Antimicrobial incise drapes are used to sustain suppression, particularly
for procedures that last more than 3 hours.
Towel Drape. A nonwoven towel drape has a band of adhesive along one edge. Used as a
draping towel, it remains fixed on skin without towel clips. This is advantageous when clips
might
obscure the view of a part exposed to x-rays during the surgical procedure. It also is used to wall
off a contaminated area, such as a stoma, from the clean skin area to prevent spilling contents
and
causing infection or chemical irritation.
Aperture Drape. Adhesive surrounds a fenestration (opening) in the plastic sheeting. This
secures the drape to the skin around the surgical site, such as an eye or ear. Caution is used in
applying
this type of drape around the face of a patient who is awake. The patient must have breathing
space. If oxygen is used during a local procedure, it can build up under the drape creating a fire
hazard
if cautery is used. Some patients experience claustrophobia. Fabric towels may not feel as
confining.

                                              cxxv
Advantages of Self-Adhering Drape Material
    Resident microbial flora from skin pores, sebaceous glands, and hair follicles cannot
     migrate laterally to the incision.
    Microorganisms do not penetrate the impermeable material.
    Landmarks and skin tones are visible through the transparent plastic.
    Inert adhesive holds drapes securely, eliminating the need for towel clips and possible
     puncture of the patient’s skin.
    Plastic sheeting conforms to body contours and has elasticity to stretch without breaking
     its adhesion to skin.
Some self-adhering drapes have sufficient moisture-vapor permeability to reduce excessive
moisture buildup that could macerate the skin or loosen adhesive. A nonporous material should
not cover more than 10% of the body surface because it may interfere with the patient’s thermal
regulatory mechanism of perspiration evaporation.
Principles of Draping
The entire team should be familiar with the draping procedure because draping is an important
step in the preparation of the patient for a surgical procedure. The scrub person should be
knowledgeable and ready to assist with draping. The scrub person is responsible for seeing that
necessary articles are arranged in proper sequence on the instrument table. Once a drape is
placed
it cannot be moved without contamination. The person responsible for draping the patient may
vary, as do materials and styles of drapes used to create a sterile field. The surgeon or assistant
usually places the self-adhering incise drape or towels and towel clips to outline the surgical
site. The scrub person assists with placing the remainder of the drapes.
During any draping procedure, the circulating nurse should stand by to direct the scrub person
as necessary and to watch carefully for breaks in technique. A contaminated drape or exposure
of a nonsterile area is a potential source of infection for the patient.
Basic principles regarding draping
1. Place drapes on a dry area. The area around or under the patient may become damp from
solutions used for skin preparation. The circulating nurse removes damp items or covers
the area to provide a dry field on which to lay sterile drapes.
2. Allow sufficient time to permit careful application.
3. Allow sufficient space to observe sterile technique. Do not reach across a nonsterile surface.
                                               cxxvi
4. Handle drapes as little as possible.
5. Never reach across the OR bed to drape the opposite side; go around it.
6. Take towels and towel clips, if used, to the side of the OR bed from which the surgeon is
going to apply them before handing them up.
7. Carry folded drapes to the OR bed. Watch the front of the sterile gown; it may bulge and
touch the nonsterile OR bed or blanket on the patient. Stand well back from the nonsterile OR
bed.
 a) Hold drapes high enough to avoid touching nonsterile areas, but avoid touching the
       overhead operating light.
 b) Hold a drape high until it is directly over the proper area, and then lay it down where it is
       to remain. Once a sheet is placed, do not adjust it. Be careful not to slide the sheet out of
       place when opening the folds.
 c) Protect gloved hands by cuffing the end of the sheet over them. Do not let gloved hands
       touch the skin of the patient or other nearby items, such as the IV.
8. In unfolding a sheet from the prepped area toward the foot or head of the OR bed, protect the
gloved hand by enclosing it in a turned-back cuff of sheet provided for this purpose. Keep
hands at table level.
9. If a drape becomes contaminated, do not handle it further. Discard it without contaminating
gloves or other items.
 a) If the end of a sheet falls below waist level, do not handle it further. Drop it, and use
       another.
 b) If in doubt as to its sterility, consider a drape contaminated.
 c) If a drape is incorrectly placed, discard it. The circulating nurse peels it from the OR bed
       without contaminating other drapes or the prepped area.
 1. A piercing towel clip that has been fastened through a drape has its points contaminated.
       Remove it only if absolutely necessary, and then discard it from the sterile setup without
       touching the points. Cover the area from which it was removed with another piece of sterile
       draping material.
Operation Theatre Ethics
The ethics of a profession establish the role and scope of professional behavior and the nature
of relationships with patients and colleagues.



                                               cxxvii
   Autonomy: Self-determination implies freedom of choice and ability to make decisions to
    determine one’s own course of action. Decisions may be made in collaboration with others,
    based on reasonable and prudent information. Decisions should be acknowledged and
    respected by others.
   Beneficence: Duty to help others seek balance between what is good to do and what might
    produce harm to another or self.
   Nonmaleficence: Duty to do no harm.
   Justice: Allocation of human, material, and technologic resources a person has a right to
    receive or claim (i.e., equality of care).
   Veracity: Devotion to truthfulness (i.e., to give accurate information).
   Fidelity: Quality of faithfulness, based on trust and honesty, which protects rights of
    individuals (e.g., dignity, privacy).
   Confidentiality: Respect for privileged information received from another person with
    disclosure only to appropriate others.
An ethical dilemma arises in the work situation when the choice between two or more
alternatives creates a conflict between an individual’s value system and moral obligation to the
patient, to the family or significant others, to the physician, or to the employer and coworkers.
Conflicts can be between rights, duties, and responsibilities.
Both legal and ethical considerations can cause conflicts. Legally, a patient has the right to
choose among treatment alternatives or the right to refuse treatment. Philosophically, the
patient’s preference may be different from that of the health care provider. The primary
responsibility to the patient is to ensure delivery of safe care. This includes use of appropriate
and available technology, but only if this is the patient’s choice, with informed consent freely
given, or is known to be the patient’s wish. Conversely, the patient and the caregiver may be
forced to face court-ordered procedures or treatments. This may impose the need to assist in a
surgical intervention such as a cesarean section on a woman who has moral or religious
objections to this form of treatment but who has been ordered by the court to have the
procedure performed for the benefit of the unborn fetus.
Maintaining Operation Theatre records
Clinical records include the admitting diagnosis, the patient’s chief complaint, complete
history and physical examination findings, the results of laboratory examinations, and the
physicians and nurse care plans. Most hospitals are moving toward electronic medical records
                                             cxxviii
accessible to all authorized caregivers via computer and the Internet. Records should state the
therapy used, including surgical procedures, and include progress notes, consultation remarks,
the patient’s condition on discharge, and observations in case of death. A summary of the
hospitalization experience should be complete. These records are signed in writing or
electronically by the physicians and nurses attending the patient.
The anesthesia record completed during the surgical procedure by the anesthesia provider also
becomes part of the patient’s record. The circulator should document pertinent remarks
regarding the care rendered in the OR and the patient’s response on the nurses’ note sheets or
the progress notes. Documentation is a responsibility of all professional team members who
implement direct patient care. Notes about the surgical procedure should be explicit, dictated
promptly after completion of the procedure, and incorporated into the record of each surgical
patient. For the surgeons’ convenience, many hospitals have dictating machines or a phone
hookup with the medical records department installed within the OR suite, usually located in
the dressing room or lounge. Voice recognition software can be used to dictate procedural
notations in the patient’s electronic records.
Details of the preoperative and postoperative diagnosis and the surgical procedure itself may
have medical and legal significance. Transcription of the surgeon’s dictation and maintenance
of the patient’s chart after discharge from the hospital are responsibilities of the medical
records department. The patient’s printed chart may be put on microfilm or captured
electronically for storage.
Retrieval for review of patient records gives the perioperative theatre technologist the
opportunity to evaluate the patient care given. Personnel records can be maintained. Other
essential records can be stored in and retrieved from computer databases on a password-
controlled basis. The central processing unit for the OR computer system usually is located in
or near the control desk. A fax and/or scanner machine may be available for the electronic
transfer of documents, records, and patient care orders between the OR and surgeons’ offices.
Security systems usually can be monitored from the control desk. Alarms are incorporated into
electrical and piped-in systems to alert personnel to the location of a system failure. A
centralized emergency call system facilitates summoning help. Some facilities have a panic
button to summon the security department. Narcotics are kept in locked cabinets and can be
signed out only by appropriate personnel.



                                            cxxix
 Access to exchange areas, offices, and storage areas may be limited during evening and night
 hours and on weekends. Doors may be locked. Some hospitals use alarm systems, video
 surveillance in hallways and ORs, and electronic metal detection devices to control intruders
 and to prevent theft or vandalism. Computers and records must be secured to protect patient
 confidentiality.
  1.2.2.4 Learning Activities
                     96     1.2.2.4.1 Field Visit to Operating Theatre
Objectives of the visit: Identify equipment for positioning patient during surgery and their
functions.
  1.2.1.5 Self-Assessment
You are provided with the following questions for self -assessment, attempt them and
check your responses
 1. A theatre technologist is preparing a patient for surgery. What are five (5) patient
     preparation procedures that the technologist will do?
 2. A patient is about to sign an informed consent. What are four (4) important information
     contained in the consent form?
 3. What is the aim of positioning a patient before a surgical procedure?
 4. During transferring of patients in theater, what are five (5) safety measures that need to
     be considered?
 5. What are five (5) complications caused by positioning?
 6. Outline characteristics of an effective draping material
 7. What are the ethical principles that need to be adhered to in an operating theater?
 8. What documentation should appear in a patients perioperative records after pre-operative
     preparation?
  1.2.2.6 Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials
  Functional OR
  OR bed
  Safety belt
  Anesthesia screen
  Lift sheet
  Arm board
  Wrist or arm strap
  Upper extremity table
  Body rest
  Stirrups
  footboard
  1.2.2.7 References
Cowperthwaite, L. Holm, R. (2015) Guideline implementation: Preoperative patient skin
antisepsis, AORN J 101(1):71–80.

                                           cxxx
Morikane, K. (2015). Use of chlorhexidine to prevent surgical site infections, J Microbiol
Immunol Infect 48(2).
Roebuck, A., Harrison, E. (2014). Operating theatre etiquette, sterile technique and surgical site
preparation, Surgery 32(3):109–116.
Kennedy, L. (2015 ). Implementing recommended practices for sterile technique, AORN J
89(1):15–23.
  1.2.2.8 Responses
 1. A theatre technologist is preparing a patient for surgery. What are five (5) patient
    preparation procedures that the technologist will do?
         Taking medical history and physical examination.
            Laboratory tests.
            Blood type and crossmatch
            Diagnostic procedures
            Give the patient written preoperative instructions to follow before admission for
             the surgical procedure
            Ensure the patient does not ingest solid foods before the surgical procedure
            The skin should be cleansed to prepare the surgical site.

 2. A patient is about to sign an informed consent. What are four (4) important information
    contained in the consent form?
        Details explaining about the surgical procedure
        Possible risks involved
        Benefits of the surgical procedure
        Alternatives to the procedure
 3. What is the aim of positioning a patient before a surgical procedure?
        Optimize surgical-site exposure for the surgeon.
            Minimize the risk for adverse physiologic effects.
            Facilitate physiologic monitoring by the anesthesia provider.
            Promote safety and security for the patient.
 4. During transferring of patients in theater, what are five (5) safety measures that need to
    be considered?
         The patient is properly identified before being transferred to the OR bed.
            The patient is assessed for mobility status, which includes determination of the
             patient’s ability to transfer between the transport cart and the OR bed.
            The OR bed and transport vehicle are securely locked in position, with the mattress
             stabilized during transfer to and from the OR bed.

                                             cxxxi
          Two people should assist an awake patient with the transfer by positioning
           themselves on each side of the patient’s transfer path.
          Adequate assistance in lifting unconscious, anesthetized, obese, or weak patients is
           necessary to prevent injury.
5. What are five (5) complications caused by positioning?
 Hemodynamic instability from orthostatic position
   Poor ventilation from thoracic compression
   Peripheral nerve injury from compression or stretch
   Tissue damage from crush or shearing force
   Ischemia of hair-bearing scalp, which causes bald spots
   Compartment syndrome
   Pressure necrosis
   Digit amputation in table bends
   Blindness from optic nerve ischemia
   Corneal abrasion
   Ischemic limbs from arterial occlusion
   Venous emboli
   Vertebral injury
   Panic attacks and feelings of claustrophobia in awake patient
6. Outline characteristics of an effective draping material
       Blood and fluid resistant to keep drapes dry and prevent migration of
           microorganisms. Material should be impermeable to moist microbial penetration
           (i.e., resistant to strike-through) and resistant to tearing, puncture, or abrasion that
           causes fiber breakdown and thus permits microbial penetration.
          Lint-free to reduce airborne contaminants and shedding into the surgical site.
           Antistatic to eliminate risk of a spark from static electricity.
           Sufficiently porous to eliminate heat buildup so as to maintain an isothermic
           environment appropriate for the patient’s body temperature.
          Drapable to fit around contours of the patient, furniture, and equipment.
          Dull and nonglaring to minimize color distortion from reflected light.
          Free of toxic ingredients, such as laundry residues and nonfast dyes.


                                             cxxxii
 7. What are the ethical principles that need to be adhered to in an operating theater?
       Autonomy
       Beneficence
       Nonmaleficence
       Justice
       Veracity
       Fidelity
       Confidentiality

 8. What documentation should appear in a patients perioperative records after pre-operative
    preparation?
  The condition of the skin around the surgical site and placement sites of the return
       electrodes
      Hair removal, if done, including the method and location, and areas for attachment of
       monitors or electrodes
      Antiseptic solutions, fat solvents, irrigating solutions, and any other agents used
      The skin area prepped and skin reaction, if any
      The name of the person who did the prep
                                97       1.2.3 Learning Outcome
Dispose of theatre waste
  1.2.3.1 Introduction to the learning outcome
This learning outcome specifies the content of competencies required to dispose of theatre waste.
It includes:
      Types of wastes in Operation Theatre
      Waste disposal methods
      Handling of Operation Theatre waste
     1.2.3.2 Performance Standard

 1.2.3.3 Information sheet
Types of wastes in Operation Theatre
  Infectious waste (e.g., tissues, materials, or equipment that have been in contact with
       blood or other body fluids).
      Pathological waste (e.g., tissues, organs, body parts, blood, infected animals from
       laboratories, and body fluids).
      Sharps (e.g., needles, hypodermic needles, scalpels, and other blades, knives, infusion
       sets, saws, and broken glass)
                                              cxxxiii
    Pharmaceutical waste (e.g., expired, spilt, and contaminated pharmaceutical products,
     discarded bottles or boxes with residues, and drug vials).
    Radioactive waste includes solid, liquid, and gaseous materials contaminated with
     radionuclide.
    Genotoxic/cytotoxic waste may include certain cytotoxic drugs often used in cancer
     therapy, vomit, urine or feces from patients treated with cytotoxic drugs, chemicals, and
     radioactive material.
    Chemical waste consists of discarded solid, liquid, and gaseous chemicals (e.g., from
     diagnostic and experimental work and from cleaning, housekeeping, and disinfecting
     procedures).
    Non-infectious/general waste includes waste generated from kitchens, packaging
     material, and from stores.
 Waste disposal methods

Method of Disposal of Sharps and Sharps Containers

The main risk that is associated with infection comes from sharps contaminated with blood.
Sharps include all objects and materials that pose a potential risk of injury and infection because
of their puncture or cutting properties (syringes with needles, blades, wires, broken glass, etc).
Place sharps in safety boxes that are resistant to punctures and leakage and are designed so that
items can be dropped in using one hand and no item can be removed. The safety box should be
marked “Danger Contaminated Sharps” and with the biohazard symbol indicated on the outside
of the box. It should be closed when three-quarters full and then placed in a yellow plastic bag
or containers with other hazardous health care waste for removal from the procedure area for
disposal. The method of choice for destruction of full safety boxes is incineration, preferably in
an appropriate double-chamber incinerator. Under exceptional circumstances, full safety boxes
may be incinerated in small numbers by open burning. The residues of incineration should be
safely buried at a depth greater than 1 meter. Do not, under any circumstances, dispose of used
syringes, needles, or safety boxes in normal garbage or dump them without prior treatment.

Encapsulation is recommended as an alternative method to safely dispose of sharps when
burning or burying them is not possible. For encapsulation, sharps are collected in puncture-
resistant and leak-proof containers.When the container is three-quarters full, a material such as
cement, plastic foam, or clay is poured into the container until it is completely filled. After the
                                             cxxxiv
material has hardened, the container is sealed and buried. It is permissible to encapsulate
chemicals or pharmaceutical waste together with sharps.

Disposal of Liquid Contaminated Waste

Liquid contaminated waste requires special handling, because it could pose an infectious risk to
HCWs who handle it. Waste water from health care facilities might contain various potentially
hazardous    components,     such   as   microbiological    pathogens,    hazardous    chemicals,
pharmaceuticals, and radioactive isotopes. Wear PPE, including utility gloves, protective
eyewear, and a plastic apron when handling and transporting liquid waste. Decontaminate
containers by placing them in a 0.5 % chlorine solution for 10 minutes before washing and
rinsing them. Remove utility gloves and wash hands and dry hands or use antiseptic hand-rub.

Disposal of solid waste

Disposal of contaminated wastes separately from non-contaminated waste, because
contaminated waste needs the following special handling:Wear heavy-duty or utility gloves
when handling and transporting solid wastes. Collect the waste containers on a regular basis and
transport the burnable ones to the incinerator or area for burning. Remove gloves and wash and
dry hands or use an antiseptic hand-rub. Non-contaminated solid wastes should be managed at
the health care-facility level or through the local authority disposal system.

Disposal of Hazardous Waste
Hazardous waste material refers to chemical and pharmaceutical waste, as well as any waste that
contains heavy metals. Hazardous waste should be incinerated or buried if the quantity is very
small. A large quantity of such materials should be sent back to the original supplier.


Pathological waste
Pathological waste includes all organs i.e placenta, tissues, blood and bodily fluids. In operation
theatres, all anatomical waste and placentas should be collected separately in a red-colored bin
with a red bin liner.Anatomy waste and placentas should be dropped into a concrete-lined
placenta pit or buried at a depth greater than 1 meter, inside the health care facility compound
in a location totally enclosed and secured from unauthorized access, and at least 100 meters
away from any underground water or well.             Anatomical waste that cannot be transported
and disposed of immediately should be stored in the mortuary.If a patient wants to take home



                                             cxxxv
the placenta or body parts for burial first place them in a plastic bag and then into a rigid
container for transport.
Infectious Waste
Place infectious waste in a yellow bin with yellow bin liners marked “Biohazard Medical
Waste.”When a bag is no more than three-quarters full, seal it with appropriate adhesive tape,
remove it, and replace it immediately with a new bag.Incinerate infectious waste in double-
chamber incinerators; dispose of ashes from the incinerator in a protected ash pit. An incinerator
must attain a temperature of between 800°C and 1,200°C.Sanitary landfill or burial is an
alternative solution when underground water is not at risk of contamination.
Hazardous           Pharmaceutical           Waste          and         Cytotoxic          Waste
Hazardous pharmaceutical waste and cytotoxic waste refers to expired pharmaceuticals or
pharmaceuticals that are unusable for other reasons (for example, a call-back campaign).
Pharmaceutical waste can be hazardous (cytotoxic). This type of waste should be placed in
specific boxes labeled “Danger Hazardous Pharmaceutical and Cytotoxic Waste!” The boxes
should be returned to the pharmacy department, which should ensure their disposal at the central
level.
   1.2.3.4 Learning Activities
1.2.3.4.1 Case study
During routine inspection of the hospital, the Quality control team in your hospital identifies a
gap in how the waste is disposed in theater. The team then organizes a continuous medical
education to theatre staff on waste management and disposal.
 a) Highlight key information the team will discuss pertaining to waste disposal in the OR?
 b) Discuss waste management in health care setting?
 c) What are the principles of waste disposal in theatre?
  1.2.1.5 Self-Assessment
You are provided with the following questions for self -assessment, attempt them and
check your responses
 1. What are examples of contaminated waste in theatre?
 2. Define waste generation
 3. What are four basic principles of waste disposal?
 4. Describe the colour coded bin waste disposal system
 5. An incinerator works best at which temperature?
 6. How is a theatre technologist supposed to handle sharps?
 7. What are five (5) types of waste found in theatre?
 1.2.2.6 Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials
  Simulated theatre waste

                                            cxxxvi
  Waste disposal bins
  Simulated OR
1.2.2.7 References
1.2.2.8 Responses
 1. What are examples of contaminated waste in theatre?
          Blood
          Body fluids
          Secretions
          Excretions
 2. Define waste generation
     Separating contaminated and non-contaminated wastes at the point of generation.
 3. What are four basic principles of waste disposal?
          Use appropriate color-coded separate containers for non-infectious, infectious,
            and highly infectious waste.
          Fill the waste containers not more than three-quarters full.
          Use color-coded bins and bin liners or label the waste containers
          Never sort through contaminated wastes. Do not try to separate non-contaminated
            waste from contaminated waste, or combustible from non-combustible waste,
            after they have been combined
 4. Describe the colour coded bin waste disposal system
          Non Infectious Waste: Includes food remains, waste paper and packaging
            material. Disposed in a BLACK color coded bin
          Infectious Waste: Includes routine clinical waste e.g. gloves, gauzes and
            bandages. Disposed in YELLOW color coded bins
          Highly Infectious: This includes body tissues/ parts e.g. teeth, placenta. Disposed
            in RED color coded bins
 5. An incinerator works best at which temperature?
     800°C and 1,200°C
 6. How is a theatre technologist supposed to handle sharps during disposal?
          Place sharps in safety boxes that are resistant to punctures and leakage and are
            designed so that items can be dropped in using one hand and no item can be
            removed.
          The safety box should be marked “Danger Contaminated Sharps” and with the
            biohazard symbol indicated on the outside of the box.
          It should be closed when three-quarters full and then placed in a yellow plastic
            bag or containers with other hazardous health care waste for removal from the
            procedure area for disposal.
          Do not handle sharps unnecessarily.
          Always put on heavy-duty gloves when handling sharps waste containers.



                                           cxxxvii
         In particular, discard all disposable syringes and needles immediately after they
          are used. The needle should not be recapped or removed from the syringe—the
          whole combination should be inserted into the safety box directly after use.
7. What are five (5) types of waste found in theatre?
 Infectious waste (e.g., tissues, materials, or equipment that have been in contact with
    blood or other body fluids).
   Pathological waste (e.g., tissues, organs, body parts, blood, infected animals from
    laboratories, and body fluids).
   Sharps (e.g., needles, hypodermic needles, scalpels, and other blades, knives, infusion
    sets, saws, and broken glass)
   Pharmaceutical waste (e.g., expired, spilt, and contaminated pharmaceutical products,
    discarded bottles or boxes with residues, and drug vials).
   Radioactive waste includes solid, liquid, and gaseous materials contaminated with
    radionuclide.
   Genotoxic/cytotoxic waste may include certain cytotoxic drugs often used in cancer
    therapy, vomit, urine or feces from patients treated with cytotoxic drugs, chemicals, and
    radioactive material.
   Chemical waste consists of discarded solid, liquid, and gaseous chemicals (e.g., from
    diagnostic and experimental work and from cleaning, housekeeping, and disinfecting
    procedures).
   Non-infectious/general waste includes waste generated from kitchens, packaging
    material, and from stores.




                                          cxxxviii
                           CHAPTER TWELVE
      EXECUTE PERIOPERATIVE THEATRE ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES
 UNIT CODE: HE/OS/TT/CR/05/6
UNIT DESCRIPTION
This unit standard specifies the competencies required to execute perioperative theatre
administrative services. It involves execution/implementation of perioperative theatre policies
and performing administrative duties. It also entails the day to day running of perioperative
theatre facility.
  It applies to Health industry.
    1. Administration
    Introduction

                                              cxxxix
   Administration is defined as the act of managing duties, responsibilities, or rules. It can also
   be defined as the act of administering; government, public affairs; the service rendered, or
   duties assumed, in conducting affairs; the conducting of any office or employment; direction.
   Types of administrations
   a) Authoritative Administration: Authoritative administration refers to
       a management style where the leader is in complete control. An authoritative leader is
       one who sets the goals, determines the processes and oversees all steps it takes to reach
       those goals with little or no input from team members
   b) Democratic Administration: Also known as participative administration or
       shared leadership, is a type of administrative style in which members of the group take
       a more participative role in the decision-making process
   c) Laissez-faire administration: also known as de- legative leadership, is a type of leadership
       style in which leaders are hands-off and allow group members to make the decisions.
1.1 Administrative duties and roles
  The role of an administrator is vital in any company and varies from organization to
  organization. However, the necessary skills or responsibilities are all the same in different
  organizations. One of the most common and significant duties of an administrator is to look after
  the business operations. For this, an administrator needs to have a good set of skills so that
  he/she can manage a team of people who can handle any situation within the organization.
  Excellent communication is one of the most important key ingredients for an administrator
  Important skills of an administrator
         A great team player

         A desire to take an initiative

         Ability to withstand pressure cooker situations

         Organization Skills and a systematic approach to work

         Good at juggling tasks and prioritizing

         Attention to minute details




                                                cxl
                                 98     Roles of an Administrator


     Planning and Organizing

Planning is the most vital task of an administrator. It is a responsibility for him/her to plan long-
term objectives that can help the organization to reach its ultimate goal. Moreover, to execute
these plans and get success is again a big responsibility. The professionals in the
admin department in any company need to analyze that how, when, where, and with whom the
plan should be made and executed accordingly.


Organizing is again equally important, which lets the administrator coordinate the efforts of a
business to reach heights of success.


     Directing

So, after planning and organizing are done, the administrator begins direction, which is to be
followed by all in the company. Leading the employees within the company to attain the main
objective of the organization needs the amalgamation of resources and an effective support
system. An interpersonal skill, which is the most commonly found talent among the
administrators, is essential as he/she needs to interact and deal with people with different
personalities. Moreover, an efficient administrator will use the potential of the workforce to
make the plan work as a set. It includes the entrustment of authority, accountability, and control
to other administrative teams.


     Staffing

Staffing is another important role of an administrator. For this, complete knowledge about the
company and to understand what it requires is very necessary. The administrator must interact
and coordinate with other departments of the organization, including the human resource
department. Not only the HR department but the admin department, too, actively take part in the
recruitment and screening process. After the hiring process is done, the admin team should
keenly appraise the progress of the new member of the company.



                                                 cxli
     Liaison

An efficient administrator is a liaison between employees and management. The admin team
understands the need for the employees as well as the management and hence plans things
accordingly to meet their demands. It helps to maintain a balance in the organization and also to
keep a positive environment free from conflicts. It is the sole responsibility of an administrator to
take care of the expectations and performances of each individual.


The administration department is the backbone of the company. A skilled and efficient
administrator is an asset to the organization. He/she is a link between the employees and the
management of the company. Without an excellent team of an admin department, an
organization cannot run smoothly.




                                                cxlii
    Figure 1




1.2 Policies and Standard Operating Procedures.
  Policies and standard operating procedures are the foundations of an organization. Even if
  they’re not written down, policies and procedures define your organization and ensure that
  things are running smoothly. For best results, however, both policies and procedures should be
  written down and codified to avoid misunderstandings or inefficiencies. There are lots of “policy
                                               cxliii
  and procedure” software’s out there that helps organizations to put those rules and processes
  down and share them with employees; in practice.


                                     99      Defining Policies



Policies are principles or beliefs within an organization that set direction, guide and influence
decision-making. Policies guide the day-to-day actions and strategies, but allow for flexibility –
the big keyword for policies is “guiding”. They establish a framework of management
philosophies, aims and objectives. Policy can be driven by business philosophy, competition,
marketplace pressure, law or regulation and in many cases all of these.

Organizational policies tend to have topics such as social media use, sick time and paid leave,
acceptable work behavior and codes of conduct, employee onboarding and termination,
workplace discrimination and proper certifications and licensing among a plethora of other
topics, some specific to your business.

                         100    Defining standard operating Procedures

SOPs have a narrow focus; they describe, step by step, what actions to take in specific instances.
Procedures have a beginning and an end and should be strictly followed to achieve the desired
outcome. The cyclical nature and uniformity of a procedure are vitally important for training new
employees, compliance, and process improvement and auditing.

Examples of procedural topics include emergency procedures in theatre, material ordering,
equipment operation or how to inventory supplies and goods

                   101     Some Key Differences between policies and SOPs

When it comes to creating, updating and implementing your policies and procedures, there are
some key differences.
Policies:

      Change infrequently
      State who, what when or why
                                                cxliv
        Are broad and general

Procedures (SOPs)

        Continuously change and improve
        State what, how, when or who
        Offer a detailed description of activities

                 102     Why are company or organizational policies important?
Company policies put in writing what you expect from your employees. These may be related to
performance, values or behavior. Additionally, company policies can serve as pre-warnings for
employees, since they outline the consequences of failing to abide by the rules.


Company policies are important for a variety of other reasons, including:


        Setting expectations
        Keeping management accountable
        Ensuring compliance with the law
        Helping defend against legal claims
        Assisting with fair treatment of employees

                       103   List of organization policies to consider creating
Here are some of the policies that your company should consider putting in place:


       1. Equal opportunity policy
Many countries mandate that you must be an equal opportunity employer by law. For example,
in the United States, the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission enforces a wide
range of federal laws that prohibit workplace discrimination.


An equal opportunity policy (EOP) prevents companies from discriminating against job
applicants or employees if they are a member of a protected class (e.g., race, gender, age,
religion, familial status, color). The EOP is essential for any anti-harassment, workplace



                                                  cxlv
violence, non-discrimination or diversity policies your company may consider developing.


     2. Workplace health and safety
It’s important to provide your employees with a safe and healthy work environment, especially
since workplace health and safety violations can cause harm to your employees, cost your
business money and damage your reputation.


Your business should be proactive and write a health and safety policy that is designed for each
workplace. For example, you might specify what employees should do in case of office
emergencies or how to handle unsafe materials. The Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA) has guidelines on how to create a safe workplace and protect workers
from occupational hazards that you can base your policy on.


     3. Employee code of conduct policy
A clear and concise code of conduct can help employees understand your r expectations in terms
of performance and behavior. This policy might include specific rules related to substance abuse,
sexual harassment, giving gifts, dress code, confidentiality, and even the use of cell
phones or social media during work hours.
4. Attendance, vacation and time-off policies
Having a standard way to request a day off or take vacation leave will help things run more
smoothly in the office. The policy should outline how much time off employees receive, when
and how they can accrue more time off, who they should contact to request their time off and
anything else they may need to know .You can also choose to create a separate attendance
policy that outlines what is considered tardy, how far in advance they should request time off and
what happens if they don’t show up for work.


Here’s an example of a company attendance policy you can use to help write your own:


Employees are expected to be on time and regular in attendance. This means being at your
workspace and ready to work at your scheduled time each day. You will be given a 10-minute
grace period after the start of your shift before you will be considered tardy. Employees who are
tardy on more than five occasions will be subject to disciplinary action. Absenteeism and

                                                cxlvi
tardiness are burdensome to your co-workers and leaders, and will not be tolerated without just
cause.


     4. Employee disciplinary action policy
Some of the most important company policies involve discipline and employee conduct. Before
you can hold your employees accountable for their actions, it’s important to record your
expectations in terms of performance and behavior in your employee handbook or individual
employee contracts. With complete access to the rules and regulations of the workplace, you can
then enforce disciplinary action when appropriate while using the employee handbook as a point
of reference.
A simple step-by-step list of what happens regarding disciplinary action can make it easy for
employees to know what to expect if they violate a company policy. Describe a specific process
you will follow to ensure every employee is treated fairly when it comes to discipline. Have a
lawyer review this information before you include it in your employee handbook to make sure all
disciplinary action is legal.


     6. Employee complaint policies
Grievances are formal complaints your employees can file to document their concerns with an
aspect of their workplace. These grievances might be filed as a result of an incident or conflict
with a fellow employee. A grievance can be filed for nearly any reason, including physical
workplace complaints, financial issues like payroll and social circumstances like harassment or
bullying. It’s important to outline a formal process for resolving complaints within your
company so that employees know how to handle their concerns in a professional way.


It may also be a good idea to develop a non-retaliation policy to protect employees who make
good faith complaints against their manager or co-workers.


                    104     How to develop company policies as an employer
If you want to develop business policies to address important workplace issues, consider
following the steps below:




                                               cxlvii
        1. Identify the need for the policy
Observe the way your management and employees deal with workplace issues, and identify
which areas could use improvement. For instance, if employees consistently violate unwritten
rules, you may consider adding a new policy that addresses this and other related issues.
2. Determine the content needed for the policy
Write down key areas that need to be addressed within the policy. For instance, you can include
different sections or clauses that prevent you or your employees from finding loopholes.
Consider all aspects of the policy, what you would like your employees to do and what you
would like them to avoid doing. It’s also a good idea to include what form of disciplinary action
will be taken if a policy is violated.
3. Communicate the new policy to employees
Current employees need to be notified of new policies when they’re released or added to the
employee handbook. You may even consider adding a signature line to the new policy to make
sure employees know that they must follow the rule from the date they sign it. This prevents
conflict later on if an employee states they were never aware of the policy after receiving
disciplinary action for violating it.


It’s also important to review and discuss company policies with new employees during
onboarding so they know what to expect. Consider having them sign a form stating that they
were given an employee handbook or a list of your policies, rules and regulations.


        4. Update and revise the policy as necessary
You may consider amending or revising your policies as necessary in accordance with laws and
regulations or according to your company’s objectives and any employee feedback.
                           Why Are Standard Operating Procedures Important?
   The important task of writing policies and procedures rarely gets the respect it deserves. Most
  people recognize the need for having standard policies, but standard operating procedures often
  get          viewed         as         a      necessary              evil.    Why   is       that?
    Good procedures and work instructions provide a way to communicate and apply consistent
  standards             and             practices             within           your   organization.
   GOOD procedures . . .
         save time and mistakes

                                                    cxlviii
        reduce training costs
        ensure consistent results
        empower the workforce
        get read and used
        support quality goals
        enable you to delegate work

  But,       BAD    procedures,       can   be   as   disastrous   as   no   procedures   at   all!
  Bad procedures . . .
        cause errors and frustration
        increase training costs
        waste time and money
        detract from quality goals
        don’t get read or used

2. Supervisory services
   Definition
   Supervision is a professional and collaborative activity between a supervisor and a worker in
   which the supervisor provides guidance and support to the worker to promote competent
   and ethical delivery of services and supports through the continuing development of the
   worker's application of accepted professional peer work knowledge, skills, and values.
   Benefits of supervision in an organization
            Supervision is a tool that can be used to achieve the agency’s mission and objectives
             Supervision improves performance and helps to manage resources
            The supervisor serves as the mediator and liaison between the agency and the
             worker
            Good supervision can increase morale and improve retention
Functions of a supervisor
a) Administrative
Administrative supervision tasks focus on the effective implementation of the agency’s policies
and procedures and the management of the peer worker’s work performance.
• Quality of work
                                                  cxlix
• Work load
• Liaison to operations - payroll, human resources
• Using program resources, including time, effectively
• Conformance or fidelity to the program model
• Record keeping
b) Educative
Educative supervision tasks focus on the professional development of the worker through
training, modeling and structuring learning experiences.
• Provide time and space to reflect on peer practice
• Focus on knowledge, skills and attitudes
• Provide individualized training and support
• Provide venue for supporting the peer worker’s professional development
c) Supportive
Supportive supervision tasks focus on the person’s morale and job satisfaction.
• Give feedback on work
• Discuss personal reactions to the work
• Validate and provide encouragement
• Promote self- care practices
• Advocate for peer support roles
Supervision formats
a) Individual supervision
Advantages
• Exclusive attention to the worker
• Often experienced as safer by the worker
• More confidential
Disadvantages
• Dependence can develop
• Exposure to only one perspective in supervision
• Lost opportunity to learn from colleagues
b) Group supervision

                                                cl
Advantages
• More efficient than individual supervision
• Supervisees share information and may learn from each other
• Can be a powerful way to reduce isolation and may foster group cohesiveness
Disadvantages
• Working in a group can be experienced as unsafe by some workers
• It may difficult to meet the specific needs of individual participants and there is a risk
discussions remain generalized and do not meet anyone’s needs in a satisfactory way
c) Co-supervision
Co - supervision is the provision of supervision by more than one supervisor • This model may
be used when the organization does not have supervisors who are peer support workers • Peer
workers may benefits from a second supervisor if their primary supervisor doesn’t have the
expertise to help them develop in their peer practice • Often, one supervisor provides more
administrative supervision and the other provides more education. Ideally, both provide
support.
Advantages
• Workers benefit from the guidance of more than one person
• Workers can develop their competencies with a skills peer support worker
Disadvantages
    Some agencies don’t have the resources to offer co – supervision
    There may be challenges in communication or disagreements between the co-supervisors
    Co - supervisors may not share the same expectations
Many organizations offer multiple formats of supervision to address different professional
development needs and different workers get different learning needs addressed by different
formats.
2.1 Human resource management :
     Human resource management is the process of employing people, training them,
     compensating them, developing policies relating to the workplace, and developing strategies
     to retain employees
    Roles of HRM

                                                 cli
                                             105     Staffing


      You need people to perform tasks and get work done in the organization. Even with the most
      sophisticated machines, humans are still needed. Because of this, one of the major tasks in HRM
      is staffing. Staffing involves the entire hiring process from posting a job to negotiating a salary
      package. Within the staffing function, there are four main steps:
1. Development of a staffing plan. This plan allows HRM to see how many people they should hire
    based on revenue expectations.

2. Development of policies to encourage multiculturalism at work. Multiculturalism in the
    workplace is becoming more and more important, as we have many more people from a variety of
    backgrounds in the workforce.

3. Recruitment. This involves finding people to fill the open positions.

4. Selection. In this stage, people will be interviewed and selected, and a proper compensation
    package will be negotiated. This step is followed by training, retention, and motivation.


                                106   Development of Workplace Policies


      Every organization has policies to ensure fairness and continuity within the organization. One
      of the jobs of HRM is to develop the verbiage surrounding these policies. In the development of
      policies, HRM, management, and executives are involved in the process. For example, the HRM
      professional will likely recognize the need for a policy or a change of policy, seek opinions on
      the policy, write the policy, and then communicate that policy to employees. It is key to note
      here that HR departments do not and cannot work alone. Everything they do needs to involve
      all other departments in the organization. Some examples of workplace policies might be the
      following:
   Discipline process policy

   Vacation time policy

   Dress code

   Ethics policy

   Internet usage policy

                                                    clii
                           107     Compensation and Benefits Administration


      HRM professionals need to determine that compensation is fair, meets industry standards, and
      is high enough to entice people to work for the organization. Compensation includes anything
      the employee receives for his or her work. In addition, HRM professionals need to make sure
      the pay is comparable to what other people performing similar jobs are being paid. This involves
      setting up pay systems that take into consideration the number of years with the organization,
      years of experience, education, and similar aspects. Examples of employee compensation
      include the following:
   Pay

   Health benefits

   retirement plans or packages

   Stock purchase plans

   Vacation time

   Sick leave

   Bonuses

   Tuition reimbursement


                                            108    Retention


      Retention involves keeping and motivating employees to stay with the organization.
      Compensation is a major factor in employee retention, but there are other factors as well. Ninety
      percent of employees leave a company for the following reasons:
1. Issues around the job they are performing

2. Challenges with their manager

3. Poor fit with organizational culture

4. Poor workplace environment




                                                   cliii
      Despite this, 90 percent of managers think employees leave as a result of pay (Rivenbark, 2010).
      As a result, managers often try to change their compensation packages to keep people from
      leaving, when compensation isn’t the reason they are leaving at all.


                                   109    Training and Development


      Once we have spent the time to hire new employees, we want to make sure they not only are
      trained to do the job but also continue to grow and develop new skills in their job. This results
      in higher productivity for the organization. Training is also a key component in employee
      motivation. Employees who feel they are developing their skills tend to be happier in their jobs,
      which results in increased employee retention. Examples of training programs might include the
      following:
   Job skills training, such as how to run a particular computer program

   Training on communication

   Team-building activities

   Policy and legal training, such as sexual harassment training and ethics training


                           110    Dealing with Laws Affecting Employment


      Human resource people must be aware of all the laws that affect the workplace. An HRM
      professional might work with some of these laws:
   Discrimination laws

   Health-care requirements

   Compensation requirements such as the minimum wage

   Worker safety laws

   Labor laws


      The legal environment of HRM is always changing, so HRM must always be aware of changes
      taking place and then communicate those changes to the entire management organization. Rather
      than presenting a chapter focused on HRM laws, we will address these laws in each relevant
      chapter.
                                                    cliv
                                       111    Worker Protection


      Safety is a major consideration in all organizations. Oftentimes new laws are created with the
      goal of setting federal or state standards to ensure worker safety. Unions and union contracts
      can also impact the requirements for worker safety in a workplace. It is up to the human resource
      manager to be aware of worker protection requirements and ensure the workplace is meeting
      both federal and union standards. Worker protection issues might include the following:
   Chemical hazards

   Heating and ventilation requirements

   Use of “no fragrance” zones

   Protection of private employee information


                                       112     Communication

      Besides these major roles, good communication skills and excellent management skills are key
      to successful human resource management as well as general management.




      Figure 2: summary of HRM roles




                                                    clv
                               113     Awareness of External Factors


     In addition to managing internal factors, the HR manager needs to consider the outside forces at
     play that may affect the organization. Outside forces, or external factors, are those things the
     company has no direct control over; however, they may be things that could positively or
     negatively impact human resources. External factors might include the following:
1. Globalization and offshoring

2. Changes to employment law

3. Health-care costs

4. Employee expectations

                                                  clvi
5. Diversity of the workforce

6. Changing demographics of the workforce

7. A more highly educated workforce

8. Layoffs and downsizing

9. Technology used, such as HR databases

10. Increased use of social networking to distribute information to employees


      For example, the recent trend in flexible work schedules (allowing employees to set their own
      schedules) and telecommuting (allowing employees to work from home or a remote location for
      a specified period of time, such as one day per week) are external factors that have affected HR.
      HRM has to be aware of these outside issues, so they can develop policies that meet not only
      the needs of the company but also the needs of the individuals. Another example is the Patient
      Protection and Affordable Care Act, signed into law in 2010. Compliance with this bill has huge
      implications for HR. For example, a company with more than fifty employees must provide
      health-care coverage or pay a penalty. Currently, it is estimated that 60 percent of employers
      offer health-care insurance to their employees (Cappelli, 2010). Because health-care insurance
      will be mandatory, cost concerns as well as using health benefits as a recruitment strategy are
      big external challenges. Any manager operating without considering outside forces will likely
      alienate employees, resulting in unmotivated, unhappy workers. Not understanding the external
      factors can also mean breaking the law, which has a concerning set of implications as well.




                                       Figure 3; Key external factors




                                                   clvii
   An understanding of key external factors is important to the successful HR professional. This
    allows him or her to be able to make strategic decisions based on changes in the external
                                          environment.



2.2 Resource utilization



                                              clviii
        Resource utilization refers to the metric that indicates whether your whole team, or individual
        employees, are fully booked. It describes the process of planning a project and ensuring the
        available resources in the company are being used to their highest potential. It helps project
        managers identify which of their employees are being over utilized so they can allocate
        responsibilities to someone else if needed, and can also assist in identifying the people who are
        underutilized, so they can assign new projects to them.
          Resource Allocation vs. Resource Utilization
    While the purpose of both processes may seem similar, there are some key distinctions to be
    drawn between the two:

        Resource allocation refers to a project manager selecting suitable employees for a project, and
         then managing them as they complete the project, reassigning or altering workloads if
         necessary.
        Resource utilization is the process of strategically measuring how effective resources are.
         Allocation organizes a project, but it is utilization that makes it successful.



                                   114     Benefits of resource utilization



   Proper utilization of resources is important for maintaining productivity, because it prevents staff
    from underperforming or being overburdened by workloads and burning out.

   Projects can be managed with better visibility, reducing the risk of oversights

   Maximum utilization of resources gives you a better ROI (Return on investment)
   It ensures that specific resources aren’t being over or under-utilized

   It allows property management systems to be agile and reschedule resources as quickly as possible
    to avoid problems surfacing or becoming worse

          Tips for Implementing Resource Utilization
    When a company has a robust resource management platform, project managers have access to
    the tools needed to approach and master effective resource utilization. Some key tips to keep in
    mind include:


                                                      clix
    Leverage Visibility – especially for larger companies, several projects may be running at the
     same time, and while they exist separately they still affect one another down the line. Rather
     than looking at projects as separate entities, formulate a resource utilization plan that can
     provide insight into project-specific metrics, as well as an overview of all resources in the
     company. This way, you will be able to assess overall work capacity and resource performance
     on a bigger picture scale, helping identify any company-wide areas of improvement.
    Beware of Scope Creep – projects are shape shifting by nature, so some will inevitably
     demand additional time and resources. It is the responsibility of the project manager to ensure
     projects don’t go over allotted time or budget. A resource utilization strategy can help
     centralize all active projects, leveraging resources equally amongst them to help keep things
     within their optimal scope.
    Always Be Prepared – as a project manager, you need to be prepared for any and all scenarios.
     During your planning process, visualize and run through various situations that could arise,
     and prepare for a change of circumstances as if it were inevitable. This way, if the budget
     changes, or a resource is lost, your team will be able to adapt more quickly.




2.3 Service delivery
    Service delivery can be defined as any contact with the public administration during which
    customers – citizens, residents or enterprises – seek or provide data, handle their affairs or fulfil
    their duties. These services should be delivered in an effective, predictable, reliable and
    customer-friendly manner.
    The four key elements for successful service delivery system are

                                                   clx
1. Service Culture is built on elements of leadership principles, norms, work habits and vision,
      mission and values. Culture is the set of overriding principles according to which management
      controls, maintains and develops the social process that manifests itself as delivery of service and
      gives value to customers. Once a superior service delivery system and a realistic service concept
      have been established, there is no other component as fundamental to the long-term success of a
      service organization as its culture.
2. Employee Engagement includes employee attitude activities, purpose driven leadership and HR
      processes. Even the best designed processes and systems will only be effective if carried out by
      people with higher engagement. Engagement is the moderator between the design and the
      execution of the service excellence model.
3. Service Quality includes strategies, processes and performance management systems. The
      strategy and process design is fundamental to the design of the overall service management model.
      Helping the client fulfil their mission and supporting them in the pursuit of their organizational
      purpose, must be the foundation of any service provider partnership.
4. Customer Experience includes elements of customer intelligence, account management and
      continuous improvements. Perception is king and constantly evaluating how both customer and
      end-user perceive service delivery is important for continuous collaboration. Successful service
      delivery works on the basis that the customer is a part of the creation and delivery of the service
      and then designs processes built on that philosophy – this is called co-creation




      2.4 Motivation of employees
        Definition: Employee motivation is defined as the enthusiasm, energy level, commitment and
        the amount of creativity that an employee brings to the organization on a daily basis.
        Employee motivation is all about how engaged an employee feels in tandem to the
        organization’s goals and how empowered he/she feels. Motivation is of two types:


       Intrinsic motivation
       Extrinsic motivation
        Motivated employees are an asset to an organization, they are directly proportional to an
        organization’s success. Motivation is intangible, difficult to measure and extremely difficult to
                                                      clxi
   control, but very easy to facilitate if done right. It’s all about intention, intensity, and
   perseverance


      Intrinsic motivation
 Intrinsic motivation means that an individual is motivated from within. He/she has the desire to
 perform well at the workplace because the results are in accordance with his/her belief system.


 An individual’s deep-rooted beliefs are usually the strongest motivational factors. Such
 individuals show common qualities like acceptance, curiosity, honor, and desire to achieve
 success.


      Extrinsic motivation
 Extrinsic motivation means an individual’s motivation is stimulated by external factors- rewards
 and recognition. Some people may never be motivated internally and only external motivation
 would work with them to get the tasks done.




      Ways of motivating employees
1. Employee motivation surveys: Use an online survey software or platform to conduct employee
   motivation surveys. Let them give candid and genuine feedback about their experience, ideas,
   and suggestions. This will help you identify areas that need your attention.
2. Employee satisfaction surveys: Employee satisfaction depends on a ton of factors such as work
   environment, infrastructure, roles and responsibilities, etc. Conducting employee satisfaction
   surveys will help Managers understand dissatisfaction factors and act on them. Frequent surveys
   will help addressing dissatisfaction issues faster.
3. Job well done- recognize it! Recognition plays a huge role in increasing the motivation levels
   of the employees. It helps create a healthy bond between the employer and employees. It not
   only fulfills our basic need of esteem but also facilitates belonging.
4. Focus on intrinsic rewards: It is true some people need rewards to get tasks done, but extrinsic
   rewards fade very quickly. Focus on motivating your employees from within. Some may even
                                                 clxii
   say, “yeah this is all good but we got to eat and pay rent”… well, that’s true, for that you
   compensate your employees well, but make sure you create values for your organization that
   are long-lasting.
5. Autonomy not bureaucracy: Micromanagement is the worst thing you can do as a manager. It
   is not only time consuming, but also really unwanted. If you have hired people with certain
   skillset let them do their job, be a facilitator, not a dictator. Human beings value autonomy, give
   them the freedom to get things done in ways acceptable and see the changes.
6. Create an amazing work environment: According to a study conducted by Ohio State
   University, your work environment seriously impacts your mood. So it does make sense to
   invest in the work environment where people actually spend 60 hours a week. Creating a good
   atmosphere will motivate your staff. Just go ahead and do it.
7. Be a visionary: Lead with vision. Employees need to know their efforts are driving something
   important. They need to know their destination and more importantly the path that will take
   them there. If as a leader you lack the vision for your own organization, how do you expect them
   to own up to your vision? Make a visual reminder of your organization’s road map, encourage
   your employees to add to that. You will be surprised how innovative they can get.
8. Solicit ideas and suggestions, act on them: Now that you have conducted surveys, you have
   received feedback from your employees. Ensure that the ideas, suggestions, grievances that they
   have put forth will looked into and addressed in a timely fashion.
9. Career-pathing: Having a career growth plan with clearly mentioned roles and responsibilities
   is crucial to employees. It helps them focus, and direct their efforts to an achievable goal. Make
   sure that you sit down with every employee and come up with a career plan that is transparent
   and communicated clearly.
10. Provide flexibility: Not all employees are alike. Some prefer coming to work daily, others not
   much. For some, commuting to work might be long and challenging. Allow some flexibility
   within reason and your employees will be happy and motivated
   Importance of employee motivation
 According to psychologists, self-realization is a very human thing. It is our basic nature to
 nurture something and see it flourish, it is applicable to most things we do in our day-to-day life.
 This is true for both social and societal spaces.




                                                     clxiii
    Motivation plays a very important factor in a human’s life. Whether it is about improving
    ourselves or our organization’s performance. Motivated employees don’t need to be told how to
    get things done, they take initiatives, are eager to take up additional responsibilities, are
    innovative and go-getters.
    Motivated employees ensure:


     There is a positive atmosphere within the organization
     Co-workers are happy and feel safe at work
     Make sure clients are happy
     They always achieve better results than their counterparts
    Motivation, therefore, plays a very important factor and ensures employees remain active and
    contribute their best towards their organization. Furthermore, a high level of motivation leads to
    a lower level of employee turnover


         Herzberg’s motivation theory
    Herzberg’s motivation theory or two-factor theory says there are two factors to which an
    organization can adjust to influence the levels of motivation at the workplace.


    The two factors identified by Herzberg are:


    1. Motivating factors: The presence of motivating factors encourages employees to work harder.
    They are the factors found in the workplace.


    2. Hygiene factors: Hygiene factor if not present will discourage employees from doing their best
    at work. Hygiene factors are the surrounding factors that facilitate employee’s behavior.
    Here are some of the examples of motivators and hygiene factor


                               Motivators                                                     Hygiene Factors

                               Recognition                                                          Security

                                 Growth                                                      Company policies

                              Achievements                                                          Salary


                                                     clxiv
                         The work itself                                               Work conditions

                         Responsibility                                               Manager/supervisor

There are 4 statistics that are involved here:


1. High hygiene & high motivation


This is an ideal situation any manager or supervisor would want to achieve. Here all the
employees are happily motivated and have very few grievances.


2. High hygiene & low motivation


In this situation, employees have very few grievances but are also not highly motivated. A very
good example of this situation is employees are paid well but the work is not very interesting.
Employees simply collect their pay cheques and leave.


3. Low hygiene and high motivation


This is a tricky one, here employees are highly motivated but also have numerous grievances. A
typical example of a situation like this is when the work is extremely interesting but the
employees are not paid as per the market standard.


4. Low hygiene & low motivation


No points for guessing, it is obviously a pretty bad situation. Here neither the employees are
motivated nor are the hygiene factors are in place.


     How to apply Herzberg’s motivation theory in practice
1. First and foremost rectify and change bureaucratic company policies. Make sure your Human
Resources is in line with what other organizations are offering and they know what the
leadership’s expectations are. Keeping both in mind draft policies that is a win-win with
everyone.



                                                 clxv
2. Ensure your managers are also mentors and not just bosses. Each employee should be
respected and supported.


3. Organizational culture plays a very crucial role here. No cliches here.


4. Make sure the compensation, perks, and bonuses are as per the market standards. If you don’t
compensate your employees well, why would they show interest in taking any initiatives?


5. To increase job satisfaction make sure the jobs are constructed well and employees find their
jobs meaningful.


6. Delegate your employees’ responsibilities, make them feel valued. Respect their individuality,
listen to their feedback seriously and take action wherever necessary.


3. Implementation of policies at work place
Policy implementation is generally defined as a series of activities undertaken by government
or organizations to achieve the goals and objectives articulated in policy statements
  Policy implementation process
  To implement effective policies and procedures at your workplace, follow these steps to get the
  best results.
                                    115     Step 1: Consultation

When developing your policies and procedures, you must consult with all relevant stakeholders,
including health and safety representatives, contractors (particularly those who work with you
regularly), and of course your employees.

Consultation should ensure that every person in your workplace understands the importance of
company policies and procedures and why they need to be implemented effectively.

It will also ensure that the policies and procedures are realistic and actionable on a daily basis.

Tip: Consultation helps to achieve more effective policies and procedures, and is a greater
motivation for employees to follow them.


                                                 clxvi
                         116      Step 2: Tailor the policy to your business

The policies and procedures you adopt need to be tailored to the needs of your business, not just
lifted straight from a generic manual.

If you use policies and procedures from another source, it is essential that you adapt them to your
company and your workplace operations.

                     117       Step 3: Define obligations clearly – be specific!

All policies should be short and succinct.

All procedural steps should be set out in clear and plain English.

This will create an ‘auditable standard’, meaning that you create a standard that can be used to
measure whether your workplace health and safety obligations are being met or not.

The obligations outlined in an auditable standard should be defined in enough detail that persons
in your workplace understand exactly what is expected of them.

Specifically state what actions should be taken. For example, don’t say “dispose of chemicals
safely“, but state how this should be done at the site, e.g. “chemicals must be disposed of in the
designated approved dangerous goods waste drum“.

                               118    Step 4: Make the policy realistic

Make sure your business has the time, resources and personnel to implement the policy.

There is no point in adopting a policy which aspires to the best practice possible if your business
cannot realistically adopt the procedures set out.

This is the development stage of the policy and procedure done. Once you have completed these
steps, you will have the policies and procedures your company needs to maintain a healthy and
safe workplace.

But the next stage is just as important as the development stage, the implementation stage…

                                                 clxvii
Don’t get too excited that you have developed the policies and procedures because without
implementing them correctly, they won’t be of any use to you.

                        119      Step 5: Publicize the policies and procedures

Put your policies and procedures in writing and make them available to your entire workforce.

If possible, keep all your policies and procedures in a single manual, and make copies readily
available to all employees.

Tip: Safety documents should also be published on the company’s intranet if you have one.

                  120     Step 6: Train all employees in policies and procedures

You have an obligation to provide adequate information, instruction, supervision and training to
your employees.

Ensure that new employees and contractors are trained and familiar with company policies and
procedures, and that existing staff receive appropriate training, e.g. annual refresher courses.

Policies and procedures should also be reiterated and discussed with staff regularly at team
meetings to ensure that employees remain aware of the importance & advantages of the policies
and procedures.

Tip: It is a good idea to have all employees and contractors sign off after they have read,
understood and agree to comply with your workplace policies. You should also keep records of
training and induction. Make sure that you record attendees and details of training content in
case an employee fails to sign a training record.

                   121        Step 7: Be consistent in your policy implementation

Supervision of your workplace to ensure that the policies and procedures are being properly
implemented by all employees is essential.

Follow-up to ensure that any failure to follow the policy or procedure is addressed.


                                                 clxviii
Specify that full compliance with the stated requirements is needed to ensure a safe workplace.

After this, any deliberate breaches of policies or procedures must be treated seriously, and dealt
with immediately and consistently.

All supervisors and managers must ‘lead by example’ in implementing policies and procedures.

If managers condone practices which do not fall within the policy, it could be argued that
disciplinary action against an employee who fails to follow the policy is unfair. The consequence
of any deliberate breach should be appropriate to the severity of the breach, whether it be:

      counselling;
      disciplinary action (e.g. a warning); or
      In serious circumstances, dismissal.

                   122     Step 8: Review all policies and procedures regularly

Policies and procedures must be reviewed periodically.

When any changes occur, ensure your policies and procedures remain relevant and effective. For
example, a change may occur when a business purchases a new piece of machinery, starts using
a new chemical or adopts a new production method. Any such changes mean that relevant
procedures should be reviewed.

Tip: The review cycle will depend on the circumstances and document type, but it is a good idea
to review policies at least every 2 years

Implement a document management system that:

      triggers reviews;
      notes the dates of change; and
      Involves interactive revision.

All employees and contractors need to be made aware of the changes to policy and procedure
when they occur.


                                                  clxix
                       123    Step 9: Enforce the workplace policies and procedures

    Once your policies and procedures have been implemented, they need to be enforced. Make sure
    that you approach this consistently as this is an important factor in being able to discipline a
    worker for a breach of policy.

                                     Problems of Policy Implementation
                124     Equality, Equity and Policy: Problems of Policy Implementation
    Theoretical framework

    Implementation is the process of turning policy into practice. However, it is common to observe
    a ‘gap’ between what was planned and what actually occurs as a result of policy implementation.
    There are three major theoretical models of policy implementation (Buse et al, 2005).

    Top-down approach: This approach sees policy formation and policy execution as distinct
    activities. Policies are set at higher levels in a political process and are then communicated to
    subordinate levels which are charged with the technical, managerial, and administrative tasks of
    putting policy into practice. Political scientists have theorized that the top-down approach
    requires that certain conditions be in place for policy implementation to be effective including:

     Clear and logically consistent objectives
     Adequate causal theory (to how particular actions would lead to desired outcomes)
      An implementation process designed to enhance compliance by implementers (using incentives
      and sanctions)
     Committed, skillful implementing officials
     Support from interest groups and legislature
     No changes in socio-economic conditions that undermine political support or the causal theory
      underlying the policy
     Adequate time and sufficient resources available
     Good coordination and communication




    Problems associated with the top down approach:

                                                     clxx
     It is very unlikely that all pre-conditions would be present at the same time
     Only adopts perspective of those in higher levels of government and neglects the role of other
      actors
     Risks over-estimating the impact of government action (neglects other factors)
     Difficult to apply where no single, dominant policy or agency is involved
     Policies change as they are being implemented
    Bottom-up approach: This approach recognizes that individuals at subordinate levels are likely
    to play an active part in implementation and may have some discretion to reshape objectives of
    the policy and change the way it is implemented. The bottom-up approach sees policy
    implementation is an interactive process involving policy makers, implementers from various
    levels of government, and ‘street level bureaucrats’ such as frontline staff. Policy may change
    during implementation.
    Problems of the bottom-up approach:

     Evaluating the effects of a policy becomes difficult
     Difficult to separate the influence of individuals and different levels of government on policy
      decisions and consequences. (Important for bureaucratic accountability)
    Principal-agent theory: In each situation there will be a relationship between principals (those
    who define policy) and agents (those who implement policy), which may include contracts or
    agreements that enable the principal to specify what is provided and check that this has been
    accomplished. The amount of discretion given to the agents and the complexity of the principal-
    agent relationship are affected by:

     The nature of the policy problem- including scale of change required, size of affected group,
      simple vs. complex intervention, ill-defined vs. clear policy, many cause vs. single cause, degree
      of political sensitivity, length of time before changes become apparent.
     The context or circumstances surrounding the problem- political and economic climate,
      technological change
     The organization of the machinery required to implement the policy- number of formal and
      informal agencies, amount of skills and resources required.
    In practice




                                                   clxxi
    Interpretation of policy directives requires the translation of knowledge on interventions into the
    particular local context. Factors to take into account when interpreting health policy include
    (Jenkin et al 2013):
     Local resources, including human resources and infrastructure
     Specific characteristics of the population
     Baseline incidence of the health problem
     The latency period before an effect of the intervention will be observed
     Local variations in the likely effectiveness of particular interventions
    Gunn (1978 in Hunter 2003) has identified ten common barriers to effective health policy
    implementation:

     The circumstances external to the implementing agency impose crippling constraints
     Lack of adequate time and sufficient resources
     The required combination of resources is not available
     The policy to be implemented is not based on a valid theory of cause and effect
     The relationship between cause and effect is indirect and there are multiple intervening links
     Dependency relationships are multiple
     There is a poor understanding of, and disagreement on, objectives
     Tasks are not fully specified in correct sequence
     There is imperfect communication and coordination




    3. Liaison services

                                                    clxxii
     Liaison services include facilitating communications, establishing partnership contract plans
     and procedures, managing conflicts, providing immediate resolution for concerns, and
     evaluating collaboration parameters
     A liaison officer is an employee who builds and maintains mutually beneficial relationships,
     facilitates communications and coordinates activities among two or more people, agencies
     or organizations. Often a member of the public relations team, liaison officers are company
     representatives that streamline operations and handle public communications,
     coordination efforts, incident response and conflict resolution. They act as technical or
     subject matter experts for the person, agency or organization they represent.


                             Roles and responsibilities of a liaison officer


    A liaison officer works in fast-paced, high-pressure environments and must be willing to take
    initiative to proactively solve conflicts and address issues. Liaison officer duties include the
    following:


    acting as contact points for all agency or organizational personnel;

    keeping lists of the agencies or personnel representing the person, agency or organization;

    facilitating meetings and cooperation among people, agencies and organizations;

    identifying problems in communications among these groups;

    collaborating and communicating with necessary constituents and the public; and

    Conducting post-mortems when an incident is wrapped up.
  Requirements for a successful liaison services in an organization
1. Champions: The liaison person must believe that the program is worthwhile
    The ideal liaison person is:


        a champion: someone who genuinely believes in the program and advocates for it
         energetically
        an opinion leader: someone with informal organizational influence



                                                 clxxiii
    A boundary spanner: someone well-connected in their workplace who can also
     communicate effectively with the program providers.
We found that where liaison people held an indifferent or negative view of the program they
unintentionally undermined it, while those who were enthusiastic amplified others’ enthusiasm.
So genuine support for the program is more important than influence or connections.


2. Credibility: The liaison person should be an authentic advocate for the program
Colleagues judged the suitability and effectiveness of their liaison person in terms of how well
they modelled and espoused research-informed policymaking. This suggests that for a liaison
person to be a credible champion they must be perceived as someone who believes in what they
are saying and knows what they are talking about.


3. Connections: The liaison person should have sound cross-organizational knowledge and
networks
The program was more creatively tailored and integrated, and better attuned to each
organization’s professional development expectations, when their liaison person consulted with
colleagues and advised the program providers. Liaison people’s ability to act as intermediaries
required them to have (or be able to rapidly acquire) knowledge about multiple aspects of their
organization. Broad connections across the organization ensured that their championing efforts
were not restricted to local contexts, but it was their nuanced understanding of diverse
organizational needs and perspectives that enabled them to represent and respond to their
colleagues so effectively.


4. Social skills: The liaison person should have good interpersonal and communication skills
The quality of connections was as important as the quantity for supporting organizational
understanding and engagement. Our most effective liaison people were persuasive,
approachable and well-liked: people are more inclined to do things for people they like.
Adaptability and project management skills were also vital.


5. Support: Organizational leaders need to visibly back the liaison person as well as the
program
Strong, visible support from managers assured liaison people that their efforts – even when they
verged on ‘nagging’ – were seen as reasonable and warranted. Colleagues confirmed that
                                            clxxiv
  evident support from above increased the liaison person’s authority and demonstrated they were
  acting on behalf of management.


  6. Incentives: If possible, the liaison person role should be incentivized within the organization
  Liaison people were more enthusiastic about the implementation when they benefited
  professionally from the role. This included building tasks into performance indicators and
  increased organizational status or exposure. But incentives should not pressure liaison people to
  coerce participation.


  7. Clear expectations: Organizations need clear upfront guidance about the liaison person role
  The liaison people in our study had strikingly different perceptions of their role (eg. as event
  organizers, project managers, collaborators, connectors, translators and integrators). Liaison
  people and their managers needed to see the role as skilled facilitation rather than merely
  administration, and to understand its key attributes, responsibilities, support needs and likely
  time commitments. The program providers must describe these clearly and realistically.
  8. Flexibility: The liaison role can be interpreted by each organization
  Providing it does not compromise implementation fidelity, it may help to take a flexible
  approach to the liaison role, so that core objectives and tasks are specified but the strategies for
  achieving them are developed locally. For example, organizations might prefer to divide the role
  between two members of staff: one taking responsibility for administration and another for
  creative and strategic decisions.


  9. Collaboration: The program providers should work with the liaison person in planning and
  problem-solving
  Where liaison people shared insider knowledge, harnessed local communication channels and
  made suggestions for increasing the benefits of the program, activities were assessed by the
  program providers and participants as more attractive and useful. This suggests that working
  with liaison people as program development partners, rather than as conduits, could increase our
  ability to develop fit-for-purpose programs that respond sensitively to local conditions.


4. Monitoring and evaluation of services
Monitoring is a continuing function that uses systematic collection of data on specific indicators
to provide the management and the main stakeholders of an ongoing intervention with
                                                clxxv
indications of the extent of achievement of objectives and progress in the use of allocated
funds.
Indicators
An indicator is a quantitative or qualitative variable that allows changes produced by an
intervention relative to what was planned to be measured. It provides a reasonably simple and
reliable basis for assessing achievement, change or performance. An indicator is preferably
numerical and can be measured over time to show changes. Indicators, which are determined
during the planning phase of a project, usually have the following components:
 What is to be measured? (What is going to change? E.g., higher number of patients
   operated on a certain condition)
 Unit of measurement to be used (to describe the change, e.g., percentage)
 Pre-programme status (sometimes called the “baseline”, e.g., 40 per cent in 2007)
 Size, magnitude or dimension of intended change (e.g., 75 per cent in 2008)
 Quality or standard of the change to be achieved (e.g., improvement such that patients
   hospital stay was lowered)
 Target populations(s) (e.g., girls vulnerable to teenage pregnancies from villages)
 Time frame (e.g., January 2008 to January 2009)




Evaluation
   Evaluation is the systematic and objective assessment of ongoing and/or completed
   projects, programmes or policies, in respect of their:
            Design
            Implementation

                                              clxxvi
          Results
The criteria applied in the evaluation are:
         Objectives
         Efficiency
         Effectiveness
         Impact
          Sustainability
Evaluation emphasizes the assessment of outcomes and impact rather than the delivery of
outputs.
Differences between monitoring and evaluation
Table 1
                                 Monitoring                     Evaluation
 Timing                          Monitoring is a continuing     Evaluation assesses the
                                 function that takes place      entire project cycle.
                                 throughout the
                                 implementation of a
                                 project/programme.
 Depth and purpose               Monitoring is a regular part   Evaluation reviews the
                                 of project or programme        achievements of the
                                 management. It focuses on      project/ programme and
                                 the implementation of the      considers whether the plan
                                 project, comparing what is     was the best one to achieve
                                 delivered with what was        the outcomes
                                 planned                        Evaluation measures
                                                                achievements, as well as
                                                                positive/ negative and
                                                                intended/ unintended
                                                                effects. Evaluation looks for
                                                                lessons to be learned from
                                                                both success and lack of

                                              clxxvii
                                                                    success, and also looks for
                                                                    best practices which can be
                                                                    applied elsewhere.
     Who conducts it                Monitoring is usually done      Evaluation is best
                                    by people directly involved     conducted by an
                                    in implementing the             independent outsider who
                                    project/ programme.             can be impartial in
                                                                    consulting project/
                                                                    programme staff.


     Relationship between monitoring and evaluation
     Data collected and insights gained in the course of monitoring between are then fed into
     and used by the evaluation process.




Importance of monitoring and evaluation in an organization
                            Greater transparency and accountability
One of the greatest benefits of M&E is helping organizations to track, analyses and report on
relevant information and data throughout the life cycle of a project. This allows the project team
to provide robust evidence for all their actions and decisions to stakeholders, donors and
community members from day one. On the other hand, stakeholders and donors acquire the
information and understanding they need to collaborate, communicate, provide inputs and make
                                              clxxviii
informed decisions about strategy improvements and project operations. Additionally, M&E
helps donors to weigh the efficacy of their funds in a project, which influences their current and
future funding plans.


                                  Improved project performance
A well planned M&E helps the project team to get a better understanding of the target
population’s needs. This helps to define the scope of the project and design objectives that are
relevant, measurable and achievable. A well-defined M&E plan also clarifies the process and
interventions that will lead to the project’s outputs and deliverable. Moreover, M&E helps the
team to plan an end-to-end indicator management system, identify effective tools and
methodologies to measure, analyses and demonstrate every intervention and its impact on
expected outcomes. This enables organizations to see their progress and identify gaps as they
arise and make timely amendments to achieve the desired results.
                                   Effective resource allocation
All project operations are interwoven around project budgets. The amount of available cash
dictates the duration and magnitude of interventions, choices of resources, number of employees
etc. M&E is an effective tool for enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of finances in project
implementation. M&E facilitates with the estimation of the value, worth and impact of project
components; and enables the team to verify what works and what doesn’t and where more
money should be invested or where budget should be cut. M&E allows the team to make
appropriate changes to the financial plan on a regular basis to avoid unfavorable contingencies.


                         Promotes learning & data-driven decision making
M&E data provides quantifiable results to help the involved parties to learn from project
successes and challenges and be more adaptive. Involved parties are better prepared to respond
to the ever-evolving project situations, determine what worked and what did not and why it did
not work and how it could be improved and make revisions based on data evidence, rather than
assumptions. The team is able to establish links between the past, present and future actions to
improve project implementation and to identify what could be replicated and scaled up for
sustainability of the current project and for future endeavors.




                                                clxxix
                            Systematic management of organization
M&E also functions as a performance management tool as it facilitates organizations to gather,
disseminate and utilize information and data to improve their internal operations and add value to
their organization. Organizations can thus focus on their objectives such as enhancing
performance, encouraging innovation, sharing and integrating lessons learned for continuous
improvement etc. M&E also streamlines organizational procedures to achieve constructive
coordination among different stakeholders and organizational units.


5. Reports
A report is a document that presents information in an organized format for a specific audience
and purpose. Although summaries of reports may be delivered orally, complete reports are
almost always in the form of written documents.
Types of reports in an organization
     Routine or Special:
A Routine Report is prepared and presented as a routine work and at a regular period of time. For
example, the annual report of an association or a company which has to be prepared by the
secretary or by the Board of Directors at the end of every financial year and copies have to be
distributed among the members.

  A routine report contains some facts or information either in detail or in a summarized form. It
  may also be of critical type containing some remark or opinion. For example, the auditor’s report
  on the final accounts of a company. Departmental managers or branch managers have to
  regularly submit routine reports to the higher authorities.

  A Special Report is prepared and presented not as a matter of routine. This is prepared on the
  basis of some enquiry or investigation either by a single individual or by a body or a committee
  or a subcommittee or a commission specially formed or entrusted with the duty

     General or Confidential:
A General Report is that which is for distribution among many, like the members of an
organization- Such reports may be printed in large numbers or even published in newspapers for
the public information. The Government publishes reports of different committees or
commissions and places them on sale to the public.
                                               clxxx
A Confidential Report is meant for some superior person or persons and is not for general
information. Sometimes the report may be so confidential that the secretary or any other person
preparing it. Writes it by hand or types it out him-self.

      Formal or Informal:
A Formal Report is that which is prepared according to some prescribed form and at a prescribed
time and is presented according to a conventional procedure. For example, the annual report of a
company or any association, a report of a branch to its head office, etc.

125     Functions or importance of a report in an organization

       Provides Information: The very purpose of preparing a report is providing information
         to various levels of management. The term management includes Foreman, Supervisor,
         Chairman, Department Manager, General Manager and Special Officer. These people are
         getting information like trend of the business, cash flow and fund flow etc.
       Helps in Selection: Out of the many information available, only relevant information is
         included in the report. A report brings many alternatives out of which a management
         has to choose one profitable alternative.
       Role in Control System: A target is fixed well in advance in an organization. The
         management has to see whether the employees are working according to the targets and
         standards. The reports are prepared in such a way as to measure the actual performance
         with the budgeted targets. If there is any unfavorable variances, the reasons are find out
         and remedial or corrective actions are taken by the management. In this way, a report
         is used as a control tool. A management can control with the help of this tool.
       Helpful in Profitable Operations: A report highlights the direction of moving the
         business and the level of operation. On the basis of this type of report, a management can
         give clear cut instructions as how to increase the profitability to its employees.
       Follow the Principle of Management by Exception: A management has only a
         minimum time to exercise control. Hence, the activities, which are not carried out
         according to planning and budget, are highlighted before the management. This is the way
         of following the principle of management by exception.
       Helpful in Achieving Overall Objectives: Report motivates the executives and
         employees to take necessary steps towards increasing the earnings of the organization

                                                clxxxi
        significantly. In this way, the management is achieving the maximum profit with the
        help of reporting system.
6. Environment protection regulations
  Environmental protection is the practice of protecting the natural environment by
  individuals, organizations and governments. Its objectives are to conserve natural resources and
  the existing natural environment and, where possible, to repair damage and reverse trends
  Waste disposal and management
  Waste management or Waste disposal is all the activities and actions required to manage waste
  from its inception to its final disposal. This includes amongst other things, collection, transport,
  treatment and disposal of waste together with monitoring and regulation. It also encompasses
  the legal and regulatory framework that relates to waste management encompassing guidance
  on recycling etc.
                            126   The Benefits of Waste Management

There are multiple benefits to treating and managing waste. In this section, we will take a closer
look at them.


     Better Environment

Probably the biggest advantage of managing waste is that it eventually leads to a better and
fresher environment.


Waste disposal units also contribute to the well-being of people by helping them become disease-
free. The best part: all of this happens while the unnecessary is duly disposed of in a proper and
sanitary manner. Multiple waste disposal units should be placed in tier-1 and tier-2 cities in a bid
to prep up the process of waste disposal. This will also help implement remarkable safety
measures in the long run.


     Reduces Pollution

When waste is managed the right way, it doesn’t merely eliminate the subsequent waste but also
reduces the impact and the intensity of harmful greenhouse gases like carbon-di-oxide, carbon
mono-oxide, and methane that are often exuded from accumulated wastes in landfills.

                                               clxxxii
Managing waste reduces our reliance on landfills while also significantly cutting down the many
factors that adversely impact our environment.


     Conserves Energy

Recycling is one of the biggest aspects of waste management, and over time, it helps conserve
energy. One of the biggest instances of this advantage can be traced to the practice of recycling
paper.


All of us are probably aware that thousands of trees are cut to produce paper. When a used paper
is recycled to create new paper, the need of cutting trees is significantly minimized. This helps
conserve energy while also reducing your carbon footprints.


     Creates Employment

The recycling industry alone creates hundreds of jobs. As more people adopt this eco-friendly
practice, organizations creating and selling recycled products come to the forefront. This helps
boost their business while also creating hundreds of jobs.


     Helps Make a Difference

By managing waste, you are also making a difference to the society and the world in general.
While none of us can completely get rid of garbage, we can always adopt eco-friendly practices
of reducing and reusing waste. This way, you create an example for the people around you, who
in turn are now motivated to embrace a sustainable approach.




                                              clxxxiii
  Source: R. (2020, May 29).
There are eight major categories of waste management, and each of them can be divided into
numerous sub-categories.


The categories include source reduction and reuse, animal feeding, recycling, composting,
fermentation, landfills, incineration, and land application. Some of these methods like reduction
and reuse can be started from the comfort of your homes.


                           127   Various Methods of Waste Disposal

Although there are many methods of disposing of waste, in this section let’s take a look at some
of the most commonly used methods that you should know about waste management.




                                              clxxxiv
     Landfills

Throwing daily waste/garbage in the landfills is the most popularly used method of waste
disposal used today. This process of waste disposal focuses attention on burying the waste in the
land. Landfills are commonly found in developing countries.


There is a process used that eliminates the odors and dangers of waste before it is placed into the
ground.


While it is true this is the most popular form of waste disposal, it is certainly far from the only
procedure and one that may also bring with it an assortment of space.


This method is becoming less these days although, thanks to the lack of space available and the
strong presence of methane and other landfill gases, both of which can cause numerous
contamination problems.


Landfills give rise to air and water pollution which severely affects the environment and can
prove fatal to the lives of humans and animals. Many areas are reconsidering the use of landfills.


     Incineration/Combustion

Incineration or combustion is a type disposal method in which municipal solid wastes are burned
at high temperatures. The process eventually converts them into residues and gaseous products.


The biggest advantage of this type of method is that it can reduce the volume of solid waste to 20
to 30 percent of the original volume. Additionally, it also decreases the space they take up while
also reducing the stress on landfills. Incinerators are primarily used in thermal treatment where
solid waste materials are converted to heat, gas, steam, and ash. Incineration is also widely
popular in countries where landfill space is no longer available, such as the US and Japan.


     Recovery and Recycling

Resource recovery is the process of taking useful discarded items for a specific next use. These
discarded items are then processed to extract or recover materials and resources or convert them
                                                clxxxv
to energy in the form of useable heat, electricity or fuel. Recycling is the process of converting
waste products into new products to prevent energy usage and consumption of fresh raw
materials. Recycling is the third component of Reduce, Reuse and Recycle waste hierarchy.


The idea behind recycling is to reduce energy usage, reduce the volume of landfills, reduce air
and water pollution, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and preserve natural resources for future
use.


       Plasma gasification

Plasma gasification is another form of waste management. Plasma is primarily an electrically
charged or highly ionized gas. Lighting is one type of plasma that produces temperatures that
exceed 12,600 °F. With this method of waste disposal, a vessel uses characteristic plasma torches
operating at +10,000 °F which is creating a gasification zone till 3,000 °F for the conversion of
solid or liquid wastes into a syngas.


During the treatment of solid waste by plasma gasification, the waste’s molecular bonds are
broken down as a result of the intense heat in the vessels and the elemental components.


Thanks to this process, the destruction of waste and dangerous materials are found. This form of
waste disposal provides renewable energy and an assortment of other fantastic benefits.


       Composting

Composting is an easy and natural bio-degradation process that takes organic wastes i.e. remains
of plants and garden and kitchen waste and turns into nutrient-rich food for your plants.


Composting, normally used for organic farming, occurs by allowing organic materials to sit in
one place for months until microbes decompose it.


Note that composting is often deemed to be one of the best methods of waste disposal as it can
turn unsafe organic products into safe compost. The process, however, has its downsides. Some
people have found it to be slow, while others have observed that it takes a lot of space. But


                                               clxxxvi
regardless of these issues, many people are still embracing home composting approaches to
manage and reduce waste.and turns it to


     Waste to Energy (Recover Energy)

Waste-to-Energy, also widely recognized by its acronym WtE is the generation of energy in the
form of heat or electricity from waste.


Waste to energy (WtE) process involves the conversion of non-recyclable waste items into
useable heat, electricity, or fuel through a variety of processes. This type of so energy is a
renewable energy source as non-recyclable waste can be used over and over again to create it.


WtE can also help reduce carbon emissions by offsetting the need for energy from fossil sources.
Over time, this reduces global warming and makes our environment better.


     Special Waste Disposal

There are certain waste types that are considered hazardous and cannot be disposed of without
special handling which will prevent contamination from occurring.


Biomedical waste is one example of such a waste disposal method. It is primarily practiced in
health care facilities and similar institutions. The special waste disposal system effectively
disposes of hazardous biomedical waste.


     Avoidance/Waste Minimization

The easier method of waste management is to reduce the creation of waste materials thereby
reducing the amount of waste going to landfills.


Waste reduction can be done through recycling old materials like jar, bags, repairing broken
items instead of buying a new one, avoiding the use of disposable products like plastic bags,
reusing second-hand items, and buying items that use less designing.




                                               clxxxvii
                       128     The Best Methods of Waste Management

Recycling and composting are a couple of the best methods of waste management. Composting
is so far only possible on a small scale, either by private individuals or in areas where waste can
be mixed with farming soil or used for landscaping purposes.


Recycling, on the other hand, can be widely used around the world, with plastic, paper, and
metal leading the list of the most recyclable items. Most material recycled is reused for its
original purpose. In some instances, they may also be sold for generating profits.




                                             References


Cappelli, P., “HR Implications of Healthcare Reform,” Human Resource Executive


         Online, March 29, 2010, accessed August 18,


          2011, http://www.hreonline.com/HRE/story.jsp?storyId=379096509.

Frasch, K. B., David Shadovitz, and Jared Shelly, “There’s No Whining in HR,” Human

         Resource Executive Online, June 30, 2009, accessed September 24,


                                              clxxxviii
         2010, http://www.hreonline.com/HRE/story.jsp?storyId=227738167.

Rivenbark, L., “The 7 Hidden Reasons Why Employees Leave,” HR Magazine, May 2005,

         accessed October 10,

          2010, http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m3495/is_5_50/ai_n13721406.
  Buse K, Mays N, Walt G (2005). Making Health Policy. Understanding Public Health Series


             Open University Press.
  Gunn LA (1978). “Why is implantation so difficult?” Management Services in Government, 33:


               169-76.
  Hunter DJ (2003). Public Health Policy. Cambridge: Polity Press.
  Jenkin RA, Jorm CM, Frommer MS (2013) Translating indicators and targets into public health
             action. In: Guest C, Ricciardi W, Kawachi I, Lang I (eds) Oxford Handbook of
              Public Health Practice, 3rd edition. Oxford University Press.
  Powell AE, Davies HTO, Bannister J, Macrea WA (2009) “Understanding the challenges of
              service change – learning from acute pain services in the UK.” Journal of the Royal
              Society of Medicine, 102(2): 62-8

R. (2020, May 29). What is Waste Management and Various Methods of Waste Disposal?

       Conserve Energy Future. https://www.conserve-energy-future.com/waste-management-

       and-waste-disposal-methods.php


Wotela, K. (2017). A proposed monitoring and evaluation curriculum based on a model that

       institutionalises monitoring and evaluation. African Evaluation Journal, 5(1).

       https://doi.org/10.4102/aej.v5i1.186


Special issue of the International Journal of Human Resource Management: Digitization and the

       transformation of human resource management. (2018). The International Journal of

       Human Resource Management, 1–5. https://doi.org/10.1080/09585192.2018.1503845
                                              clxxxix
Lunenburg, F. C., & Ornstein, A. (2021). Educational Administration: Concepts and Practices

       (7th ed.). SAGE Publications, Inc.


Nicholson, JD, W. C. (2005). Standard operating procedures. Journal of Emergency Management,

       3(6), 25. https://doi.org/10.5055/jem.2005.0060


Reed, M. E. (2000). Policies and procedures governing the use of new devices in operating rooms.

       Aesthetic Surgery, 20(3), 0258–0259. https://doi.org/10.1067/maj.2000.107329


Impact of Motivation on Employees. (2016). International Journal of Science and Research

       (IJSR), 5(2), 1836–1839. https://doi.org/10.21275/v5i2.nov161570




                                              cxc
CHAPTER 10

MAINTAINANCE OF OT INSTRUMENTS AND APPARATUS




                            cxci
                          CHAPTER 10:
     MAINTENANCE OF PERIOPERATIVE THEATRE INSTRUMENTS AND
                          APPARATUS
Unit of learning code: HE/CU/TT/CR/03/6/A
Related Unit of Competency in Occupational Standard: Maintain Perioperative Theatre
instruments and apparatus.

1.1 Introduction to the unit of learning
This unit standard specifies the competencies required in maintaining perioperative theatre
instruments and apparatus. It involves necessary precautions importantly followed in the
context of operation theatre setting to avoid breakage, accidents, and infection. It also includes
general repair of Operation theatre instruments and apparatuses
Upon completion of this unit the learner will be able to prepare to dis-assemble and assemble
perioperation theatre instruments, check and assemble perioperation theatre instruments, pack
and sterilize perioperation theatre instruments, store operation theatre instruments and
apparatus, evaluate care of instruments and apparatuses in Perioperation theatre.


                                               i
1.2.1 Learning Outcome 1: Prepare to dis-assemble and assemble Perioperation Theatre
instruments
Introduction
This unit trainees will train how to adhere to safety practices in Operation Theatre, tools for dis-
assembling and assembling theatre instruments and apparatus, classification of surgical
instrument and Operation Theatre Practice
Definition of key terms
Alloy: A combination of several different kinds of metals. Alloys are used in the manufacture
of stainless steel.
Box lock: The hinge point of many surgical instruments.
Chisel: An orthopedic instrument used to slice bone; one side is straight and the other is beveled.
Curettage: The removal of tissue by scraping with a surgical curette.
Dilator: Graduated, smooth instrument that is used to increase the diameter of an anatomical
opening in tissue.
 Double-action rongeur: A bone-cutting instrument with two hinges in the middle. This
increases leverage and strength of the instrument.
Elevator: A straight instrument with curved sharp or dull tip used to separate tissue layers such
as periosteum from bone.
Gouge: A V-shaped bone chisel. Hemostat: A surgical clamp most often used to occlude a blood
vessel.
 Rongeur: A hinged instrument with sharp, cup-shaped tips that is used to extract pieces of bone
or other connective tissue. Serosa: The delicate outer layer of tissue of most organs.
Anodized: The instrument is exposed to conditions that cause an oxide coating that is relatively
impenetrable to atmospheric oxygen. Instruments can be anodized to reduce reflections.
Atraumatic: Without injury.
Crushing: Destructive effects of specific instruments. Some procedures require the use of
crushing clamps. Cutting Separating with a sharp instrument or device.
Debulking: Decrease in mass or volume using an instrument or device.
Dilation: Enlarging an opening in a progressive manner.
Dissection: Process of separating tissues through anatomic planes by using sharp or blunt
instrumentation.
Evacuating: Emptying a cavity or space.
Grasping Holding in a traumatic or atraumatic manner.
Instillation: Fluid is slowly introduced into a cavity or space.
Occlusion: Closing a lumen for the purpose of the procedure. The closure can be permanent or
temporary.
Percutaneous: Enter directly through the skin; without incision.
Retraction: Stabilizing a tissue layer in a safe position for exposure of a part. A retractor can be
manual or self-retaining.
Shank: The area of a surgical instrument between the box lock and the finger ring. Single-action
rongeur: A heavy cutting instrument that has one hinge.
Tenaculum: A grasping instrument with sharp pointed tips, generally used to manipulate or
grasp tissue such as the thyroid or cervix.
                                                ii
Content/methodology/illustrations
Instrument Categorization
Surgical instruments are one of the most important components of a surgical procedure, and they
are quite literally an extension of the practitioner’s hands. When the surgical team is
appropriately acquainted with the name, function and proper handling of the multitude of
instruments available to them, it not only enhances the surgical procedure, but it positively
shapes the entire experience for the ultimate end user – the patient.
All instruments are categorized by function. The nine categories are: Accessory; Clamping and
Occluding; Cutting and Dissecting; Grasping and Holding; Dilating and Probing; Exposing and
Retracting; Aspirating and Suctioning; Stapling and Suturing; and Viewing.
Accessory: An accessory is any instrument that does not fit into a category, but is an important
part of the surgical procedure and has a specific function. Examples of accessories are: mallets,
harmonic scalpels and guide pins.
Clamping and Occluding: Used to compress or close blood vessels or hollow organs, for
hemostasis or occlusion. Examples are: Crile hemostatic forceps and tube occluding clamps.
 Cutting and Dissecting: Used to separate or incise, dissect or excise soft or compact tissue
with a variety of cutting edges and designs. Examples are: scalpels, Iris scissors and curettes.
Grasping and Holding: Grasping and holding instruments are designed to grip, manipulate and
stabilize body tissues. They may also be used to extract foreign bodies. Examples are: Allis
tissue forceps, and Backhaus towel clamps.
Dilating and Probing: These instruments are used to probe, expand, examine or create an
anatomic passage; to enlarge or open a stricture or introduce another instrument. Examples are:
Hank uterine dilator, Sklar mini-dilators/OS finders and probes with eyes.
 Exposing and Retracting: Designed to pull aside or hold back wound edges and other tissues
to gain access to the surgery or operation site. These instruments are usually called “retractors,”
with blunt “blades” that may be curved or angled, or with sharp or dull prongs. Blades vary in
size, and some retractors are double ended or come in a variety of shapes, lengths and widths
depending on functional needs. Examples are: bone hooks, Volkman retractors and Zalkind
retractors.
Aspirating and Suctioning: Aspirating and suctioning instruments are used to remove blood
and other fluids and debris from the operating site. These instruments are hollow tipped and
come in a variety of sizes and shapes for ease of access. Examples are: cannulas, aspiration
suction tubes.
 Stapling and Suturing: Used to align, secure and approximate the edges of soft or compact
tissue for healing; they may employ implants like sutures, staples, clips wires or screws.
Examples are: needle holders, suture needles and terminal end staplers.
Viewing: Viewing instruments allow the practitioner to illuminate a cavity or structure such as
a nasal cavity. Examples include: endoscopes, nasal specula and lighted vaginal specula.
Content/Procedures/methods/illustrations
Classification of surgical instrument
Various basic maneuvers are common to all surgical procedures. The surgeon dissects, resects,
or alters tissues and/or organs to restore or repair bodily functions or body parts. Bleeding must
be controlled during the process. Surgical instruments are designed to provide the tools the
                                               iii
surgeon needs for each maneuver. Whether they are small or large, short or long, straight or
curved, sharp or blunt, all instruments can be classified by their function. Because the
nomenclature is not standardized, the names of specific instruments must be learned in the
clinical practice setting. All instruments should be used only for their intended purpose, and they
should not be abused.

Dissecting and Cutting Instruments Dissection instruments have sharp edges. They are used
to cut, incise, separate, or excise tissues. There are two types of dissecting instruments: sharp
and blunt. Sharp dissecting instruments should be kept separate from other instruments, and the
sharp edges should be protected during cleaning, sterilizing, and storing. To prevent injury to
the handler and damage to the sharp edges, proper precautions are necessary to take during the
handling or disposing of all sharps, blades, or scalpels.

Scalpels
The type of scalpel most commonly used has a reusable handle with a disposable blade. Most
handles are made of brass; the blades may be made of carbon steel. Blades vary by size and
shape (Fig. 19-1); handles vary by width and length (Fig. 19-2). Blades with a numeric prefix
of “1” as in a “10” series (e.g., 10, 11, 12, and 15) fit handle size number 3 or 7. Blades with a
numeric prefix of “2” as in “20” series (e.g., 20, 22, or 25) fit handle size number 4. Disposable
scalpels also are available, but are not weighted the same as metal handles. Most surgeons prefer
reusable metal scalpel handles. Blade is attached to a reusable handle by slipping the blade into
the grooves on the narrow edge of the handle. An instrument, never the fingers, is used to attach
and detach the blade; this instrument, usually a heavy hemostat or Kelly clamp, should not touch
the cutting edge. Needle holders are not designed to load scalpel blades and the jaws can become
misaligned by excess torque. The following are descriptions of blade and scalpel combinations:
   • Number 10 blades are rounded toward the tip and are often used to open the skin.
   • Number 11 blades have a linear edge with a sharp tip. Can be used to make the initial skin
  puncture for tiny deep incisions.
   • Number 12 blades have a curved cutting surface like a hook. Commonly used for
  tonsillectomy.
   • Number 15 blades have a short rounded edge for shallow short controlled incisions.
   • Number 20 blades are shaped similar to number 10 blades but larger.
  An assortment of blades with angulations and configurations for specific uses, such as a Beaver
  blade, also are used. These blades insert into a special universal handle that secures by turning
  a screw-in collar.
Figure 1: Diagram of different sizes of surgical blades




                                               iv
Knives
 Knives come in various sizes and configurations. Like a kitchen paring knife, they usually have
 a blade at one end that may have one or two cutting edges. The knives are designed for very
 specific purposes (e.g., cataract knife). Other types of knives have detachable and replaceable
 blades (e.g., dermatome). A knife blade may be incorporated into a multifunctional instrument,
 such as a gastrointestinal anastomosis (GIA) or end-to-end anastomosis (EEA) stapler that cuts
 and staples tissue simultaneously.
 Figure 2: Diagram of a cataract knife




                                              v
Scissors
The blades of scissors may be straight, angled, or curved, as well as serrated, wedge-shaped,
sharp, blunt, or combined sharp-blunt tips.
The handles may be long or short. Some scissors are used only to cut or dissect tissues; others
are used to cut other materials. To maintain sharpness of the cutting edges and proper alignment
of the blades, scissors should be used only for their intended purpose:
 • Tissue/dissecting scissors have sharp or blunt tips. The type and location of tissue to be cut
determine which scissors the surgeon will use. Blades needed to cut tough tissues are heavier
than those needed to cut fine, delicate structures. Curved or angled blades are needed to reach
under or around structures.
 • Tissue scissors with blunt tips can be used to bluntly dissect between individual planes before
sharply dissecting. Handles to reach deep into body cavities are longer than those needed for
superficial tissues.
 • Suture scissors have sharp-blunt points to prevent structures close to the suture from being
cut. The scrub person may use scissors to cut sutures during preparation if needed.
 • Wire scissors have short, heavy serrated blades. Wire scissors are used instead of suture
scissors to cut stainless steel sutures. Heavy wire cutters are used to cut bone fixation wires.

Figure 3: Diagram of a dissecting scissor (a) and parts of atypical scissor in (b)




                                              vi
(a)                                                          (b)
  Short jaw sharp-tipped scissors are used for deep, confined areas such as the nasal cavity.
 Sharp-tipped angled scissors with short jaws are used for vascular surgery.
 Dressing/bandage scissors are used to cut drains and dressings and to open items such as
plastic packets. The protective tip prevents cutting into concealed structures.
 Small scissors with especially wedge-shaped tips such as tenotomy scissors used for blunt and
sharp dissection.
 Cutters and Saws
Many types of instruments have cutting edges suitable for cutting into or through bone and
cartilage. Some have moving parts, such as rib cutters. Others, such as drills, saws, and
reamers, are powered by air or electricity and have disposable tips and blades.
 Blunt Dissectors
Friable tissues or tissue planes can be separated by blunt dissection. The scalpel handle, the
blunt sides of tissue scissors blades, and dissecting sponges may be used for this purpose.
Elevators, strippers, and dissectors can be used to remove adherent tissue such as periosteum
from bone or dura from the inner aspect of the skull.
Debulking Instruments Debulking instruments include curettes, chisels, osteotomes, gouges,
rasps, and files. The purpose of these instruments is to decrease the bulk of firm tissue and not
necessarily cut along defined tissue planes.




Figure 4 above showing the diagram of an Osteotome

Biopsy forceps and punches
                                             vii
A small piece of tissue for pathologic examination may be removed with a biopsy forceps
Curettes
 Soft tissue or bone is removed by scraping with the sharp edge of the loop, ring, or scoop on
the end of a curette.
 Snares
 A loop of wire may be put around a pedicle to dissect tissue such as a tonsil or a polyp. The
wire cuts the pedicle as it retracts into the instrument. The wire is discarded and replaced with
a new one after use.
Grasping and Holding Instruments
Tissues should be grasped a traumatically and held in position so the surgeon can perform the
desired maneuver, such as dissecting or suturing (approximating), without injuring the
surrounding subcutaneous tissues or perforating the skin. Forceps without ring handles are
commonly referred to as pick-ups. Delicate Forceps Fine tissues such as eye tissue are held
with delicate forceps. They can be toothed or smooth, straight or angled.
Adson Forceps
Forceps are used to pick up or hold soft tissues in approximation during closure. They can be
toothed or smooth.
Bayonet Forceps
Forceps are angled like a bayonet to prevent the user’s hand from occluding vision in a small
space.
Tissue Forceps Also referred to as thumb forceps or pick-ups, smooth forceps resemble
tweezers. They are tapered and have serrations (grooves) at the tip. They may be straight or
bayonet (angled), short or long, and delicate or heavy. Smooth forceps are atraumatic and will
not injure delicate structures.
Toothed Tissue Forceps
Toothed forceps differ from smooth forceps at the tip. Rather than being serrated, they have a
single tooth on one side that fits between two teeth on the opposing side or they have a row of
multiple teeth at the tip. Heavy types are sometimes referred to as rat-toothed forceps. Toothed
forceps provide a firm hold on tough tissues, including skin. Finer versions have delicate teeth
for holding more delicate tissue. Care is taken not to perforate the epidermis or dermis when
holding tissue.
Allis Forceps
Allis forceps have ringed handles and lock with ratchets. Each jaw curves slightly inward, and
there is a row of teeth at the end. The teeth grasp tissue edges securely. Allis forceps can be
short or long. Some of the long forceps have a slight curve, such as those used with a
hemorrhoid band ligator.
Babcock Forceps
Babcock forceps have ringed handles and lock with ratchets. The end of each jaw of a Babcock
forceps is rounded to fit around a tubular structure (i.e., fallopian tube) or to grasp tissue
without injury. This rounded section is circumferentially fenestrated. Babcock forceps are
straight and can be short or long; they are not occlusive or crushing.

                                             viii
Lahey Forceps: Lahey forceps have ringed handles and lock with ratchets. The jaws of the
Lahey forceps have sharp apposing points for grasping tough organs or tumors during excision.
They are not occlusive or crushing.
Stone Forceps: Either curved or straight forceps are used to grasp polyps or calculi such as
kidney stones or gallstones. Stone forceps have blunt loops or cups at the end of the jaws and
do not have ratchets.
Tenaculums
 Tenaculums have ringed handles and lock with ratchets and may have a single tooth or
multiple teeth, such as a Jacob tenaculum. The curved or angled points on the ends of the jaws
tenaculums penetrate tissue to grasp firmly, such as when a uterine tenaculum is attached to
the cervix and used to manipulate the uterus during laparoscopy. Some uterine tenaculums
have a built-in uterine cannula or probe elevator tip, such as a Hulka tenaculum. A uterine
cannula, or probe, can be used during laparoscopy to raise the uterus into the visual field. The
cannula tip is inserted into the cervical OS as the tenaculum is clamped on the anterior aspect
of the cervix. Dye or contrast media can be instilled through the cannula into the uterine cavity
to visualize tubal patency or the inner configuration of the uterine cavity. Some styles have a
tenaculum stabilizer tip attached.
Bone Holders Grasping forceps
 Vice-Grip pliers, and other types of heavy holding forceps stabilize bone. Some styles have
ring handles and locking ratchets. Others have compression grips and do not lock.
Clamping and Occluding Instruments
Instruments that clamp and occlude are used to apply pressure. Some clamps are designed to
crush the structure as the instrument is applied and are considered traumatic. The clamped
crushed structure is usually sewn, clipped, or electro coagulated and then removed. Other
clamps are non-crushing (atraumatic) and are used to occlude or secure tissue, which is restored
to patency at some point during the surgical procedure. Hemostatic Clamps Most clamps used
for occluding blood vessels have two opposing jaws (with or without serrations or teeth),
ringed handles, and lock with ratchets. Most ring-handled clamps have a common design. The
length and shape of the shanks or jaws may vary according to the intended function of the
instrument.
 Hemostats
Hemostats are the most commonly used surgical instruments and are used primarily to clamp
blood vessels. They have a crushing action. Hemostats have either straight or curved slender
jaws that taper to a fine point. The serrations are longitudinal or horizontal inside the jaws.
Crushing Clamps
Many variations of hemostatic forceps are used to crush tissues or clamp blood vessels. The
jaws may be straight, curved, or angled, and the serrations may be horizontal, diagonal, or
longitudinal. The tip may be pointed or rounded or have a tooth along the jaw such as on a
Heaney clamp or hysterectomy clamps length of the jaws and handles varies.
Many forceps are named for the surgeon who designed the style, such as the Kocher and the
Ochsner clamps. Some instruments are designed to be used on specific organs. The features of
the instrument will determine its use. Fine tips are needed for small vessels and structures.
                                             ix
Longer and sturdier jaws are needed for larger vessels, dense structures, and thick tissue.
Longer shanks are needed to reach structures deep in body cavities. Tissue that has been
crushed is usually sutured or stapled.
Noncrushing Clamps
Noncrushing clamps are used to occlude bowel or major blood vessels temporarily, which
minimizes tissue trauma. The jaws of these types of clamps have opposing rows of fine
serrations, but have a softer hold on tissues. The jaws may be straight, curved, angled, or S-
shaped.
Retracting and Exposing Instruments Soft tissues, muscles, and other structures should be
pulled aside for exposure of the intended surgical site. Manual Retractors Most handheld
retractors have an ergonomic handle and blade. The term blade should not be confused with
scalpel. The blades vary in width and length to correspond to the size and depth of the incision.
The curved or angled blade may be solid for body wall retraction (i.e., Mayo, Richardson, or
Kelly retractors), fenestrated like a wire whisk for delicate tissue retraction (i.e., lung retractor),
or pronged like a rake for raising tissue edges (i.e., Freeman facelift retractor). The prongs on
the blades of a rake can be dull or sharp. Some retractors have different sized blades at both
ends with a handle in the middle. Other retractors have traction grooves or serrations for
slippery surfaces such as the tongue malleable retractor is a flat length of low-carbon stainless
steel, silver, or silver-plated copper that may be bent to the desired angle and depth for
retraction. Referred to as ribbon retractors, they can be found in assorted widths from 1/2 inch
to 4 inches. Some malleable blades attach into self-retaining or bed mounted retractors. Hooks
Single, double, or multiple very fine hooks with sharp points are used to retract delicate
structures. Hooks are commonly used to retract skin edges during a wide-flap dissection such
as a facelift or mastectomy.
 Some styles of hooks have ball tips, which cause less trauma to tissues. Some hook styles have
elastic attachments that are mounted into a preformed frame over the incision. Care is taken
not to perforate the epidermis or dermis when using a hook retractor. Only the subcutaneous
tissue is held back.
Retaining Retractors
 Holding devices with two or more flat or hooked blades can be inserted to spread the edges of
an incision and hold them apart. For example, a rib spreader holds the chest open during a
thoracic or cardiac procedure with flat blades. A self-retaining retractor may have shallow or
deep blades. Some retractors have ratchets or spring locks to keep the device open; others have
wing nuts to secure the blades. Some self-retaining retractors have interchangeable blades of
different sizes. Each part of the self-retaining retractor is accounted for at the end of the surgical
procedure. Detachable blades or wing nuts can be lost during closure. Bed-Mounted Retractors
Some self-retaining retractors can be attached to the operating bed for stability when a long
surgical incision is planned. A bed-mounted retractor is packaged and sterilized separately in
one or two trays because of the numerous blades and attachments. All of the parts are counted
items. The component parts include an assortment of blades, connecting ratchets, a mounting
frame for the blades, and an upright post that attaches to the side rail of the operating bed at
the level of the mattress. The scrub person passes the attaching end of the upright post to the
                                                x
circulating nurse who securely connects the post to the OR bed frame with a screw-bolt. The
attached end touched by the circulating nurse is no longer sterile. The upright part of the post
remains sterile and the mounting frame is attached by the surgeon at the working height
desired. The individual blades and ratchets are placed by the surgeon and the first assistant to
attain the exposure needed to perform the surgical procedure. Bed-mounted retractors are
useful in preventing fatigue of the team for long procedures. Care is taken to prevent the upright
post from resting against the patient’s body. Permanent nerve injury can result from prolonged
pressure of an immobile post against a nerve during the surgical procedure.
Needle Holders
 Most needle holders have ring handles and locking ratchets. They are used to grasp and hold
curved surgical needles. Most needle holders resemble hemostatic forceps; the basic difference
is the shortness of the jaws. A needle holder has short, sturdy jaws for grasping a needle without
damaging it or the suture material. The jaws are usually straight, but they may be curved or
angled. The inner surfaces of the jaws also may differ such as crosshatched, serrated, or have
a central notch for stability. The size of the needle holder should match the size of the needle
(i.e. heavy jaws for large needles and slim jaws for small needles)
Needle holders can be constructed of various lengths and weights. Heavy snub-nosed needle
holders are useful for stainless steel sutures. Long-handled needle holders facilitate needle
placement in surgical sites such as the pelvis or chest. Short needle holders are used
superficially on the skin or subcuticular tissue. Specialty needle holders may have spring
handles with or without locks. The jaws of the micro needle holders used for ophthalmic
surgery and microsurgery may be either diamond-cut or crosshatched. They can be curved,
angled, or straight. A needle holder should not be placed on a magnetic pad because it may
become magnetized and cause needle release problems when suturing. Tungsten Carbide Jaws
Tungsten carbide is a hard metal. Jaws with an insert of solid tungsten carbide with diamond-
cut precision teeth are designed specifically to eliminate the twisting and turning of the needle
in the needle holder.
 These diamond-jaw needle holders can be identified by the gold plating on the handles.
Crosshatched Jaws
The serrations on the inside surface of the jaws are crisscrossed rather than grooved.
Crosshatching provides a smoother surface and prevents damage to the needle.
Winged Instruments Surgeons can examine the interior of body cavities, hollow organs, or
structures with viewing instruments and can perform many procedures through them.
Speculums The hinged, blunt blades of a speculum enlarge and hold open a canal (e.g., vagina,
rectum or a cavity (e.g., nose. An ear speculum is like a funnel.
Endoscopes
The round or oval sheath of an endoscope is inserted into a body orifice (rigid or flexible) or
through a small percutaneous skin incision guided by a trocar assembly (rigid). Each type of
endoscope is designed for viewing in a specific anatomic location. Many accessory instruments
and robotics are used through endoscopes.
 Hollow Endoscopes

                                              xi
In a hollow endoscope, the rigid hollow sheath permits viewing in a forward direction through
the endoscope (i.e. bronchoscope, esophagoscope, or sigmoidoscope). The sheath is made of
brass, stainless steel, or plastic. A light carrier supplied by a fiberoptic cable provides
illumination. A working space is created by manual insufflation of air. Lensed Endoscopes
Lensed endoscopes have either rigid or flexible sheaths, and they have an eyepiece with a
telescopic lens system for viewing in several directions. Lighting is provided through fiberoptic
cable and an electric light source with extremely bright lamps. Used in combination with video-
assisted technology, computerization permits recording action videos and still digital
photography. Many endoscopes have working channels for performing specialized procedures.
Lensed instruments are complex and require careful handling to avoid damage.
 Aspiration, Instillation, and Irrigation Instruments Blood, body fluids, tissue, and irrigating
solution may be removed by mechanical suction or manual aspiration. Reusable suction tips
aspiration devices have lumens that are difficult to terminally clean and sterilize. Many of these
items are available in disposable models.
Aspiration
Aspiration, or suction, involves the application of negative pressure (less than atmospheric
pressure) for evacuating blood or fluids, usually for visibility at the surgical site. An
appropriate style tip is attached to sterile tubing; many tips are disposable. The style of the
suction tip depends on where it is to be used and the surgeon’s preference. Disposable styles
are preferred because the inner lumen is difficult to clean. Blood, body fluid, or tissue may be
aspirated manually to obtain a specimen for laboratory examination or to obtain bone marrow
for transplantation. Suction is often performed with a needle and syringe.

Poole Abdominal Tip
The Poole abdominal suction tip is a straight hollow tube with a perforated outer filter shield.
It is used during abdominal laparotomy or within any cavity in which copious amounts of fluid
or pus are encountered. The outer filter shield prevents the adjacent tissues from being pulled
into the suction apparatus. This outer shield is completely removable.
Frazier Tip
The Frazier tip is a right-angle tube with a small diameter. It is used when encountering little
or no fluid except capillary bleeding and irrigating fluid, such as in brain, spinal, plastic, or
orthopedic procedures. The Frazier tip keeps the field dry without the need for sponging. One
model has a connection for an electrosurgical unit, and the tip can be used for fulguration. A
fiberoptic cable can be attached to another model. The vacuum exerted by the suction is
controlled by a small hole that is covered by the thumb in the handgrip of the Frazier.
Yankauer Tip
 The Yankauer tip is a hollow tube that has an angled shaft and a perforated round-ball tip.
This suction tip is also referred to as tonsil suction. Large quantities of blood and fluid can be
suctioned quickly with a Yankauer tip, which is useful for visualization during ruptured
aneurysms. Reusable Yankauer suction tips have a removable end cap that screws on. This
must be accounted for at the end of the procedure. It is easily lost in a patient.
Trocar
                                             xii
 A trocar assembly may be needed to cut through tissues for access to fluid or a body cavity.
A trocar has two parts—a sharp obturator and a sheath or a blunt obturator and sheath. The
sharp obturator with the sheath is used to perforate the tissues. When the trocar assembly is in
place the obturator is removed, leaving the sheath in position and creating a stented tunnel for
drainage of fluids, introduction of instrumentation, or instillation of medication. Some trocars
have suction ports, such as is used for draining the gallbladder.
Endoscopic instruments may be manipulated through special trocars that have valves for
insufflation, irrigation, and aspiration.
Cannula
A cannula with a blunt end and perforations around the tip may be used to aspirate fluid without
cutting into tissue. Cannulae also are used to open blocked vessels or ducts for drainage or to
shunt blood flow from the surgical site.
Dilating and Probing Instruments
Malleable copper and brass dilators and probes can be plated with chromium or silver. A set
of Hank, Hawkins, Pratt, or Hegar dilators are used to dilate the uterine cervix. A probe is used
to explore a path in the structure or to locate an obstruction. Probes are used to explore the
depth of a wound or to trace the path of a fistula. Probes and dilation instruments used as
tunneling devices can make a passage under the skin for a vascular graft or shunt.
Measuring Instruments Rulers, depth gauges, templates, and trial sizers are used to measure
parts of the patient’s body.
Instruments many accessories are used in addition to the basic instruments previously
discussed. For example, a mallet may be needed to drive a cutting instrument into bone.
Screwdrivers are used to affix screws into bone. Each surgical specialty has its own
accessories, many of which are described in the specialty chapters. One example is the Hudson
brace that is used to manually drill through the cranium
 Of the thousands of instruments available, surgeons choose those that are most suitable to
meet their particular needs. Differences in the size, curvature, or angulation of jaws or blades;
in the length of handles; and in the weight and shape of the instruments can simplify, improve,
and even shorten surgical time, which ultimately benefits the patient. Instruments should be
maintained to provide the specific function each has been designed to do.
Microinstrumentation
Improved outcomes of surgical intervention using microsurgical techniques are to a great
extent the result of the miniaturized precision instrumentation developed in association with
the performance of these delicate procedures. The instruments are extremely fine, delicate, and
miniature enough to handle in the very small working areas, such as the eye, spine, brain, or
other body parts requiring microsurgery. Manipulation becomes more difficult with increased
size or bulk and weight. As with techniques, instruments are constantly being improved.
Surgeons work with manufacturers to develop appropriate instruments, suture materials, and
needles. Many surgeons purchase the instruments of their choice. Whether owned by the
surgeon or the facility, microinstruments require exacting care to maintain desired function.
Instruments are designed to conform to hand movements under the microscope. They must
permit secure grasp, ease of holding and manipulation, and fulfillment of their intended
                                             xiii
 purpose. They are shaped to not obscure the limited field of view. Although these factors are
 important criteria for any instrument, they are especially vital for microinstruments. Everyone
 assisting in or setting up for microsurgical procedures must know the identification and
 functions of these unique instruments. Design is coincident to function. Material and Surface
 Microinstruments are made of stainless steel or titanium. Titanium alloy is considerably
 stronger yet lighter weight than stainless steel. Some microinstruments are malleable for
 desired angling. Some are disposable. All are extremely vulnerable to abuse. Finishes of at
 least the portions of instruments exposed to light in the surgical field are deliberately dulled
 during manufacture to reduce glare under the microscope, which is both annoying and tiring
 to the surgeon. Titanium microinstruments have a dull blue finish. Shape and Tips
 Microinstruments are shorter than standard instruments and often are angulated for
 convenience of approach and avoidance of obstruction of the surgical field. Instrument tips
 have minimal separation, which is compatible with their function. Finger pressure and
 movement necessary to close wide tips are undesirable, because they may induce tremor.
 Handles
 Handles are designed for a secure and comfortable grasp, with a diameter comparable to that
 of a pen or pencil. Minimal diameter between fingers facilitates feel and accuracy of
 manipulation. Double-handled instruments (scissors, needle holders) have a slightly larger
 diameter than single-handled ones (razor knife). The shape of the handle is also important for
 manipulation. For example, instruments that are rotated between fingers when in use, such as
 forceps, must be turned easily. Their handles therefore are rounded or have six sides like a
 pencil. Those that are not rotated have finger grips or are flattened. Ring-handled instruments
 are not practical in microsurgery. Many instruments, particularly scissors and some needle
 holders, have spring handles that return tips to the open position between cutting or grasping
 functions. The distance from hinge to tip will vary according to function. Proper spring tension
 can be easily ruined by mishandling. Handles should be long enough for comfort in the working
 position but must not extend beyond the working distance to contact the unsterile objective of
 the microscope. The maximum length of most microinstruments is about 4 inches (100 mm).
 Gripping surfaces should be functionally located to prevent fingers from slipping during
 manipulation. These surfaces serve as a guide to accurate finger positioning. The gripping area
 may have a six-sided, round, knurled, or flat and serrated surface. Tactile sense is important to
 the procedure so the surgeon does not have to look at the instrument to use it.
Self-assessment
 1. What is the relationship between the characteristics of a particular type of tissue and the
     instruments that are used on that tissue?
 2. On what types of tissue would you not use an instrument with teeth (one that punctures)?
 3. What is the advantage of having a right-angled instrument?
 4. What is the most efficient way to learn the names of surgical instruments?
 5. Describe a tenaculum.
 6. List the correct scalpel blade numbers and their handles.
 7. How would you protect the cutting edges of instruments from damage during surgery?
 8. What is the function of a self-retaining retractor?
                                              xiv
 9. Describe your personal plan for learning the names and uses of instruments.

Case study
As a student, you are scrubbed on a large case. Your preceptor has shown you which instruments
will be needed during the case. As the preceptor names the instruments, you remember only a
few of the names. To make matters more difficult, the preceptor does not tell you the technical
name of the instruments but refers to them by the nicknames used at this hospital. What
strategies might you use to pass the correct instrument even though you do not know the name?

Reference
Nilsen E: Managing equipment and instruments in the operating room, AORN Journal 81:349,
2005.
Spry C: Care and handling of basic surgical instruments, AORN Journal 86:S77, 2007.




Learning outcome 2: Check and assemble OT instruments and apparatus
This unit trainees will train how to establishing the working condition of Operation Theatre
instruments, impact knowledge and skills of referral of faulty Operation Theatre instruments,
assemble various parts of Operation Theatre instruments and apparatus conduct Operation
Theatre practice and pack and sterilize Operation Theatre instruments
Inspecting surgical instruments
The surgical technologist takes a proactive role in checking instruments for safety and correct
operation. This can be done while instruments are being prepared for a procedure, or after the
procedure when instruments are sorted and prepared for terminal disinfection. Stainless steel
instruments can be damaged mechanically or structurally, or there can be defects on the surface
that lead to weakness or cross-infection.
Damaged instruments must be withdrawn from service because they can lead to patient injury,
lost operating time, and increased expense.
Scissors
 Look for pitting, chipping, and fractures along the blade edges. Vertical cracks in the blade tine
are serious and may mean that the instrument cannot be repaired.
Check that the scissor tips meet precisely and are not bent or chipped. Sharp dissection scissors
can develop burrs on the tips, usually from misuse or rough handling with heavier instruments.
When the scissors are opened and closed, there should be no grinding of tips or shanks, which
would indicate rough edges or bent tines. 3. The center screw of the scissors can become worn
                                               xv
with time. When the scissors are opened and closed, they should feel snug but not tight at the
center screw. 4. Test the blades for sharpness by cutting through a surgical glove. There should
be no resistance, and the blade should cut a straight line. Remove dull scissors from active use
as soon as a defect is noticed.
     Anesthetic machine or Boyle's machine is used by anesthesiologists to support
     administration of anaesthesia
     The most common type of anesthetic machine is designed to provide an accurate and
     continuous supply of medical gases (such as oxygen and nitrous oxide) mixed with an
     accurate concentration of anaesthetic vapour (such as isoflurane), and deliver this to the
     patient at a safe pressure and flow.
     Modern machines incorporate a ventilator, suction unit, and patient monitoring devices.
     The original concept of Boyle's machine was invented by the British anesthetist Henry
     Boyle (1875–1941) in 1917.
     Components of an Anesthesia machine
     A modern anaesthesia machine includes the following components:
     Connections to piped hospital oxygen, medical air, and nitrous oxide.
     Reserve gas cylinders of oxygen, air, and nitrous oxide attached via a specific yoke with a
     Bodok seal.
     A high-flow oxygen flush which provides pure oxygen at 30-75 litres/minute
     Pressure gauges, regulators and 'pop-off' valves, to protect the machine components and
     patient from high-pressure gases
     Flow meters (rota meters) for oxygen, air, and nitrous oxide, low Flow meters for oxygen
     nitrous oxide
     Updated vaporizers to provide accurate dosage control when using volatile anaesthetics
     An integrated ventilator to properly ventilate the patient during administration of
     anaesthesia
     A manual ventilation bag in combination with an Adjustable Pressure Limiting (APL)
     valve
     Systems for monitoring the gases being administered to, and exhaled by the patient
     Systems for monitoring the patient's heart rate, ECG, blood pressure and oxygen
     saturation, in some cases with additional options for monitoring end-tidal carbon dioxide
     and temperature.
 — An anesthesia machine is a device which is used to deliver a precisely known but variable
     gas mixture including anesthetic and life-sustaining gases to the patient's respiratory
     system
 — Generally, a variable concentration gas mixture of oxygen, nitrous oxide and anesthetic
     vapor like ether or halothane is obtained from the machine and is made to flow through
     the breathing circuit to the patient.
 — Anesthesia machine is composed of two subsystems:
       (i) The gas supply-delivery unit, which consists of tubing and flow meters
             interconnected in parallel; and
      (ii) The anesthetic vaporizers, which is used to produce an anesthetic vapour from a
             volatile liquid.
                                             xvi
Maintenance of General Anesthesia
The anesthesia provider attempts to maintain the lightest level of anesthesia in the brain
compatible with operating conditions. The following are five objectives of general anesthesia:
1. Oxygenation: Tissues, especially the brain, must be continuously perfused with oxygenated
blood. The color of the blood, amount and kind of bleeding, and pulse oximetry are indicators
of the adequacy of oxygenation. Controls on the anesthesia machine and monitors of vital
functions keep the anesthesia provider aware of the patient’s condition. 2. Unconsciousness:
The patient remains asleep and unaware of the environment during the surgical procedure. 3.
Analgesia: The patient must be free of pain during the surgical procedure. 4. Muscle relaxation:
Muscle relaxation must be constantly assessed to provide necessary amounts of drugs that cause
skeletal muscles to relax. Less tissue manipulation is required when muscles are relaxed. 5.
Control of autonomic reflexes: Anesthetic agents affect cardiovascular and respiratory systems.
Tissue manipulations and systemic reactions to them may be altered by drugs that control the
autonomic nervous system. Anesthesia Machine. General anesthesia is maintained by inhalation
of gases and IV injection of drugs. An anesthesia machine is always used to deliver oxygen-
anesthetic mixtures to the patient through a breathing system. The anesthesia machine includes
sources of oxygen and gases with flowmeters for measuring and controlling their delivery;
devices to volatilize and deliver liquid anesthetics; a gas-driven mechanical ventilator; devices
for monitoring the ECG, blood pressure, inspired oxygen, and end-tidal carbon dioxide; and
alarm systems to signal apnea or disconnection of the breathing circuit. Breathing tubes of
corrugated rubber or plastic carry gases from the machine to the facemask and breathing system.
The reservoir (breathing) bag compensates for variations in respiratory demand and permits
assisted or controlled ventilation by manual or mechanical compression of the bag. Sterile
disposable sets containing tubing, a mask, a Y-connector, and a reservoir bag are commercially
available in conductive and nonconductive materials.
Learning outcome: Pack and sterilize Operation Theatre instruments
Definition of key terms
Aeration -Warm circulating air is used to remove ethylene oxide sterilant gas from packages in
a special chamber for a specified period of time.
Bowie-Dick test- Class 2 chemical indicator used in a prevacuum sterilizer to test the efficacy
of the air removal cycle.
Custom packs- Prepackaged collections of disposable supplies, drapes, sponges, and containers
prepared by the manufacturer or the distributor according to specific instructions and requests
by a particular service at a facility.
 Flash sterilization- A rapid method of steam sterilizing properly prepared instruments for
immediate use. These instruments are not wrapped. Flash sterilization is not the preferred
method of sterilization.
Gravity displacement sterilizer- A steam sterilizer that uses steam in a downward motion to
remove air from the sterilizing chamber. Air exits near front lower drain. Can be high speed or
pulsing.
Indicator- Devices inserted into a packed set and attached to the outside of the
wrapper/container used by health care personnel to monitor sterilization exposure conditions.
Integrator- A chemical device inserted into a packed set that changes in response the time,
                                             xvii
temperature, and steam penetration to demonstrate visually that parameters necessary for
sterilization have been met.
Prevacuum sterilizer -A faster steam sterilizer that removes air by a vacuum before filling the
chamber with steam. Also known as dynamic air removal steam sterilization. Process challenge
pack
Sterilization- Processes by which all pathogenic and nonpathogenic microorganisms, including
endospores, are killed. This term refers only to a validated process capable of destroying all
forms of microbial life, including endospores.
The sterilizer- is a piece of equipment used to attain either physical or chemical sterilization.
The agent used must be capable of killing all forms of microorganisms. Strike-through Moisture
or other substance penetrates through a sterile drape or wrapper to an unsterile surface. Strike-
through provides a pathway for capillary action.
Terminal cleaning- Thorough cleaning and disinfection of the perioperative environment at the
end of use.
Contents/methods/procedures/illustrations
Assembly of Instrument Sets
The weight of instruments and density of metal mass are distributed in the tray to allow steam
penetration for sterilizing and revaporization for drying. A large tray distributes instruments so
they make minimum contact with one another.
The size, design, and density of instruments are more important than their weight. The
conditions necessary for steam sterilization are difficult to achieve in exceedingly heavy sets.
Trays should not be overloaded. Closed container instrument sets should not weigh more than
25 pounds. Consideration is given to the personnel who must lift and move the packed sets when
determining the presterilization weight. To assemble instrument sets for sterilization, the
following steps should be performed: 1. Make sure the instruments are thoroughly dry. All
instruments belonging to each set must have passed through terminal cleaning and terminal
sterilization before they are safe to handle. 2. Unless contraindicated, place an absorbent towel
or foam in the bottom of the tray to absorb condensate, as for a rigid container with vacuum
valves. Include a biologic indicator or chemical integrator in the tray.
 3. Count instruments as they are placed in the tray, and record the number of each type. A
preprinted form is often used for this purpose. This form might be placed in the tray before
wrapping and sterilization so the circulating nurse and scrub person can verify the baseline
count. The form can be folded in half and placed in a paper peel pouch without a plastic coating
to prevent printer toner from transferring to the instruments during processing. Concerns for
toner particulate transfer to the instruments during the cycle are under study. The best choice
may be to affix the tray inventory count sheet to the outside of the package. 4. Arrange the
instruments in a definite pattern to protect them from damage and to facilitate their removal for
counting and use. Follow the instrument book or other listing of instruments to be included. 5.
Place heavy inst 6. Open the hinges and box locks on all hinged instruments. 7. Place ring-
handled instruments on stringers or holders designed for this purpose. The curved jaws of
hemostatic forceps and clamps should point in the same direction from smallest to largest.
Instruments should be grouped by style and classification (e.g., six straight hemostats, six curved
hemostats). Do not band with rubber bands. The metal under the band will not sterilize
                                              xviii
adequately. 8. Place sharp and delicate instruments on top of other instruments. They can be
separated with an absorbent material or left in a sterilizing rack with the blades and tips
suspended. The blades of scissors, other cutting edges, and delicate tips should not touch other
instruments. If the instrument has a protective guard, leave it on. Tip-protecting covers or
instrument-protecting plastic sleeves should be made of material that is steam-permeable and
does not melt or deform with heat. 9. Place concave or cupped instruments with the cupped
surfaces down so that water condensate does not collect in them during steam sterilization and
drying.
 10. Disassemble all detachable parts. Some parts, such as screws and springs, can be put in a
peel pouch that is left open. Sealed pouches may not process correctly during the sterilization
process.
 11. Separate dissimilar metals. For example, brass knife handles and malleable retractors
should be separated from stainless steel instruments. Preferably, put each metal in a separate
tray, or separate metals with absorbent material.
 12. Place instruments with a lumen, such as a suction tip, in as near a horizontal position as
possible. These instruments should be tilted as little as possible to prevent trapped air or the
pooling of water condensate.
 13. Distribute weight as evenly as possible in the tray. Some trays have dividers, clips, and pins
that attach to the bottom, which help prevent instruments from shifting and keep them in
alignment.
 14. Wrap the tray, or place it in a rigid container. Check woven textile wrappers for holes or
abrasion. Sequentially double wrap in a woven or nonwoven material, or use a double thickness
wrap in a single-fold configuration.
 15. Place a chemical indicator tab or tape on the outside wrapper or container for proof that the
package has been through the parameters necessary for sterilization.
 16. Label the sets appropriately with their intended use (e.g., basic set), the date sterilized, and
the process lot control number.
Packaging Instruments and Other Items for Sterilization To be effective, the sterilizing agent
must come into direct contact with all surfaces of every instrument. Therefore instruments must
be packaged (individually or in sets) in such a way to allow adequate exposure to the sterilant,
prevent air from being trapped and moisture from being retained during the sterilization process,
and ensure sterile transfer to the sterile field.4 The majority of surgical instruments are made of
stainless steel and can be sterilized by steam under pressure. Effective steam sterilization
involves the direct contact of all surfaces with steam and the revaporization of water condensate
to produce a dry, sterile instrument.
Instrument Packaging For sterilizing and transporting, instruments are put in a closed container
or wrapped individually. Instruments placed in open trays are wrapped as sets. Instruments may
be sterilized unwrapped in a high-speed steam sterilizer immediately before use (not
recommended), may be prepared in advance as for a case cart, or may be retained in sterile core
storage until needed.4 Packaging Considerations The packaging materials for all methods of
sterilization should do the following:4
 • Permit penetration of the sterilizing agent to achieve sterilization of all items in the package.

                                               xix
 • Allow the release of the sterilizing agent at the end of the exposure period and allow adequate
drying or aerating.
 • Withstand the physical conditions of the sterilizing process.
 • Maintain integrity of the package at varying atmospheric and humidity levels. In dry climates
or at high altitudes, some packaging materials are susceptible to rupture during sterilization or
dry out and crack in storage.
 • Provide an impermeable barrier to microorganisms, dust particles, and moisture after
sterilization. Items must remain sterile from the time they are removed from the sterilizer until
they are used.
 • Cover items completely and easily and fasten securely with adhesive strip or a heat seal that
cannot be resealed after opening. Seal integrity should be tamperproof. A margin of at least 1
inch (2.5 cm) is considered a standard for safety on all sealed packages. Scissors should not be
used to cut off the end of a package. Contents cannot be drawn out over this cut end because the
contents would be contaminated by the edge of the packaging material. For the same reason,
packages are never torn open below a seal.
 • Resist tears and punctures in handling. If accidental tears and holes do occur, they must be
visible.
 • Identification of the contents and the chemical indicator evidence of exposure to a sterilizing
agent should be placed on a label that is visible on the outside of the package.
 • Be free of toxic ingredients and nonfast dyes.
 • Be lint-free or low-linting.
 • Protect the contents from physical damage.
 • Permit easy removal of the contents with transfer to the sterile field without contamination or
delamination (separation into layers). • Be economical. Packages should be wrapped far enough
away from sterile storage areas so that mixing sterile and nonsterile packages is not possible.
Cabinets that contain nonsterile items should be labeled conspicuously. A procedure for sending
items to and receiving items from the sterilizer should be set up so that sterile and nonsterile
packages can never be confused en route. This procedure must be understood by everyone.
Packages may be wrapped with nonwoven or woven materials sequentially in two layers.
Double-thickness wrapping in one layer without using the sequential method is also acceptable.
The wrappers can be stitched around the edges or bonded/fused together. Aseptic presentation
to the sterile field is the prime consideration. Each facility should determine which method and
material is best suited to the clinical environment.
Handling Powered Instruments Before any new or repaired powered instrument is put into use,
the biomedical technician should verify that the instrument is functioning according to the
manufacturer’s specifications. Powered instruments are not without some inherent dangers. Key
points in handling powered instruments include the following:
 1. Set the instrument and attachments alone on a small sterile table with the safety switch on
when they are not in use. This provides added protection from inadvertent activation.
 2. Handle and store the air hose or electrical power cord with care. A broken air hose can whip
out of control. A broken electrical cord can short-circuit the instrument. Always inspect the hose
and cord for cracks and breaks.

                                              xx
 3. To prevent inadvertent activation, assemble the appropriate handpiece, attachments (e.g.,
blades, drills, reamers), and power source with the safety mechanism in position. Always be
certain that attachments are completely seated and locked in the handpiece.
 4. Test whether the instrument is in working condition before the surgeon is ready to use it and
before it is applied to the patient. To prevent inadvertent activation, the safety mechanism must
be set in position until ready to use and when changing attachments. Cleaning and Sterilizing
Powered Instruments Powered instruments should always be operated, cleaned, and sterilized
according to the manufacturer’s directions for use andcare. Each instrument has different
cleaning, lubricating, packaging, and sterilizing requirements because of its various component
parts. The bioburden is determined by the size, design, complexity, and condition of the
instrument; the degree of contamination during use; and subsequent decontaminating and
cleaning procedures. Microorganisms can become entrapped around the seals on rotating shafts.
For instruments with a specific biologic challenge, manufacturers test in the area most difficult
to sterilize and recommend sterilization cycles accordingly. The following general guidelines
apply to the care of all powered instruments:
 1. Clean and decontaminate the instrument immediately after use to maintain optimal function.
a. During the surgical procedure, the scrub person should wipe off any organic debris between
uses. b. The accessories are disassembled for cleaning. Do not process the powered instrument
with a bit, burr, or blade in place. The metal against metal prevents sterilization of the unit. If
the blade, burr, or bit needs to be changed during the procedure the exposed unsterile surfaces
will contaminate the field. c. The air hose should remain attached to the handpiece during
cleaning. The air hose and electrical cord should be wiped with detergent, damp cloth, and dry
towel. d. The motor is not immersed in liquid. The power mechanism cannot be cleaned in a
basin of solution or put in a washer-sterilizer, a washer-decontaminator, or an ultrasonic cleaner.
The surface of the instrument is wiped with a mild detergent, and caution is used to prevent
solution from entering the internal mechanism. The detergent is wiped off with a damp cloth,
and the mechanism is dried with a lint-free towel.
 2. Lubricate the instrument as recommended by the manufacturer. Handling Instruments
Surgical instruments are expensive and represent a major investment. Surgical procedures have
become more complicated and intricate, and as a result, instruments have become more
complex, more precise in design, and more delicate in structure. Abuse, misuse, inadequate
cleaning or processing, or rough handling can damage and reduce the life expectancy of even
the most durable instrument, and the cost of repair or replacement becomes unnecessarily high.
Instruments do deteriorate from normal use, but with proper care an instrument should have a
life of 10 years or more.2,5
Setting Up the Instrument Table Standardized basic sets of sterile instruments are selected for
each specific surgical procedure. A set is a group of instruments that may include all appropriate
classifications of instruments or the instruments needed for a specific part of the procedure (e.g.,
a gallbladder set). The surgeon may prefer some specific instruments that are wrapped separately
or added to the instrument set. Instruments are usually prepared, wrapped, and sterilized several
hours or days before the surgical procedure so they are dry and cool for safe handling.1
Instruments are sometimes steam sterilized immediately before use if there is no other
alternative, but this method is not recommended as a routine practice.3 Key elements of
                                               xxi
decontamination and processing might be skipped, leaving the instruments unready for
sterilization. The scrub person counts all instruments, sponges, and sharps with the circulating
nurse. Some sets will have printed count sheets enclosed. Observe for incidental transfer of toner
from the count sheet to the instruments during steam sterilization. Instruments with fused-on
toner should not be used in patient care. Essential points in handling instruments before the
surgical procedure include:
 1. Handle loose instruments separately to prevent interlocking or crushing. a. Instruments are
never piled one on top of another on an instrument table; they are laid side by side on a rolled
sterile towel. Close the box locks on the instrument to avoid entanglement when placed on the
Mayo stand. b. Microsurgical, ophthalmic, and other delicate instruments are vulnerable to
damage through rough handling. Tip protectors are removed and discarded during setup. c.
Metal-to-metal contact should be avoided or minimized. Scalpel blades should not be set in a
metal basin. The edges can become dull, and small chips of metal can become dislodged and
inadvertently transferred to the patient during irrigation.
 2. Inspect instruments such as scissors and forceps for alignment, imperfections, cleanliness,
and working condition. Unclean instruments render the entire set contaminated.1,4 Remove any
malfunctioning instrument from the set. It should be labeled and sent for repair. Replace it in
the set with a correctly functioning instrument before processing. If the procedure is in process,
the circulating nurse can obtain a sterile replacement and remove the broken instrument from
the room. Be sure to reconcile the count sheet. a. Scalpel blades should be properly set in
handles using a heavy instrument, not fingers. b. Teeth and serrations should align exactly. c.
Tips should be straight and in alignment. d. Scissors should be snug and sharp in action. e.
Cannulae should be clear and without obstruction. Stylets should be removed.
 3. Sort instruments neatly by classifications.
 4. Keep ring-handled instruments together with the curvatures and angles pointed in the same
direction positioned smallest to largest. Do not permit the instruments to become tangled on the
towel roll. a. Hang ring handles over a rolled towel or over the edge of the instrument tray or
container within the sterile field. b. Remove instrument stringers or holders if used to keep box
locks open during processing. c. Close box locks on the first ratchet as the setup progresses.
 5. Leave retractors and other heavy instruments in a tray or container, or lay them out on a flat
surface of the table. Do not permit any instrument to hang over the edge of the sterile field.
 6. Protect sharp blades, edges, and tips. They should not touch anything. Take care not to
perforate the sterile table cover. a. Sets of instruments, such as osteotomes or microsurgical
instruments, may be in sterilization racks so that the blades and tips are suspended. These
instruments can remain in racks during the initial table setup and until they are needed during
the surgical procedure. b. Tip-protecting covers or instrument-protecting plastic sleeves should
be removed and discarded before the instruments are used on the patient. Most covers and
sleeves are not radiopaque and could become a retained foreign body. c. If they are not in a
rack, handles should be supported on a rolled towel or gauze sponge. This keeps the blades and
tips of microinstruments suspended in midair for easy visualization. Handling Instruments
During the Surgical Procedure Efficient instrument handling throughout the surgical procedure
is the hallmark of an efficient scrub person.6 Key points in handling instruments during the
surgical procedure include the following:
                                              xxii
 1. Know the name and appropriate use of each instrument. Using fine instruments for heavy
tissue damages the instrument.
 2. Handle instruments individually. Tangled instruments are hard to separate in an emergency.6
Instruments on the Mayo stand should be closed to minimize fumbling for the correct item. a.
If several instruments of the same type will be needed in rapid succession (e.g., hemostats to
clamp subcutaneous vessels), three or four may be picked up at one time, but they are closed
and passed individually to the surgeon and/or first assistant. b. Instruments with sharp edges
and fine tips are more susceptible to damage than are standard instruments. The edges are easily
dulled, and the tips are easily bent or broken. Extreme caution is necessary to prevent catching
the tips of microinstruments on any object that could bend them.
 3. Hand the surgeon or assistant the correct instrument for each particular task. Remember the
following principle: Use for the intended purpose only. a. Avoid placing fingers in the
instrument rings as the instrument is passed. The instrument may inadvertently drop or snag on
drapes, causing an untoward injury to the patient or a team member. The instrument may fall to
the floor, thus becoming damaged and contaminated. b. Many surgeons use hand signals to
indicate the type of instrument needed. An understanding of what is taking place at the surgical
site makes these signals meaningful. c. Select instruments appropriate to the location of the
surgical site; short instruments are used for superficial work, and long ones are used for work
deep in a body cavity. Experience will facilitate instrument selection according to the surgeon’s
preference and need. d. Many instruments are used in pairs or in sequence.6 When the surgeon
clamps and/or cuts tissue, he or she will usually request suture. To use suture, the surgeon will
need to grasp the tissue with a pick-up for stabilization. After using suture, the surgeon or
assistant will need scissors to cut or a hemostat to hold the end of the strand as a tag. e. Hand
instruments around the incisional area, not directly over it, to prevent possible injury. f.
Knowledge of anatomy is useful for determining which instrument is needed.
 4. Pass instruments decisively and firmly. When the surgeon extends his or her hand, the
instrument should be slapped or placed firmly into his or her palm in the proper position for use.
In general, when passing a curved instrument, the curve of the instrument aligns with the
direction of the curve of the
surgeon’s hand. The following points should be remembered when passing an instrument to the
surgeon: a. If the surgeon is on the opposite side of the operating bed, pass across right hand to
right hand (or with the left hand to a left-handed surgeon). The curve of the instrument should
match the curve of the surgeon’s hand. b. If the surgeon or assistant is on the same side of the
operating bed and to the right, pass with your left hand; if the surgeon or assistant is to your left,
pass with your right hand. c. Ring-handled instruments are held near the box lock by the scrub
person and passed by rotating the wrist clockwise to place the handle directly into the surgeon’s
waiting hand (Fig. 19-46). d. Clip appliers are held between the fingers by the hinged joint
during loading and passing. Placing fingers in the rings may cause the clip to be discharged
unintentionally. The loaded applier is passed so the rings automatically pass over the surgeon’s
finger in a position of function for rapid use. e. Sharp and delicate instruments may be placed
on a flat surface for the surgeon to pick up (e.g., “no touch zone”).6 This technique avoids
potential contact with items such as cutting blades, sharp points, and needles in hand-to-hand
transfer. Always protect the hands when manipulating sharp instruments. Some surgeons prefer
                                               xxiii
to have all instruments passed directly so great care is taken to place the instrument in the waiting
hand without causing the surgeon to look up away from the field. This is common in
microsurgery.
 5. Watch the sterile field for loose instruments. After use, wipe the blood from the surface and
place them promptly on the Mayo stand or instrument table in a position of function.1 The
weight of instruments can injure the patient or cause postoperative discomfort. Keeping
instruments off the field also decreases the possibility of their falling to the floor.
 6. With a moist sponge, wipe blood and organic debris from instruments promptly after each
use. This is referred to as point of use cleaning.1 a. Demineralized, sterile distilled water should
be used to wipe instruments. Saline, blood, and other solutions can damage surfaces, causing
corrosion and, ultimately, pitting. b. Blood and debris that are allowed to dry on surfaces, in
box locks, and in crevices increase the bioburden that could be carried into the surgical site.
Dried material is harder to remove during processing.4 c. A nonfibrous sponge should be used
to wipe off microsurgical, ophthalmic, and other delicate tips. This type of sponge prevents the
snagging and breaking of delicate tips, and the
• FIG. 19-46 Passing an instrument. Tip is visible; hand is free. Handle is placed directly into
waiting hand. Avoid potential for lint is decreased. Commercial microsurgical instrument wipes
are available.
 7. Flush the suction tip and tubing with sterile distilled water periodically to keep the lumens
patent.1 Use only a few milliliters of solution if using irrigating fluids from the surgical field.
Keep a tally of the amount used to clear the suction line, and deduct this amount from the total
used to irrigate the surgical site. Accurate accounting of the solutions used for patient irrigation
is necessary when determining the amount of blood lost during the surgical procedure.
 8. Remove debris from electrosurgical (ESU) tips to ensure electrical contact. Disposable
abrasive tip cleaners are helpful for maintaining the conductivity and effectiveness of the surface
of the tip. Do not use a tip cleaner on Teflon-coated ESU tips. Avoid using a scalpel blade to
clean electrosurgical tips, because the debris may become airborne and contaminate the surgical
field.
 9. Place used instruments that will not be needed again (except sharp, cutting, delicate, or
powered instruments) into a tray or basin during or at the end of the surgical procedure. a. Blood
and gross debris are removed at the point of use before actual cleaning and decontamination in
the processing area.1 b. Carelessly dropping, tossing, or throwing instruments into a basin
causes damage. c. Instruments that have been wiped can be immersed in a basin of sterile
demineralized distilled water, not saline solution. The sodium chloride in saline solution and in
blood is corrosive and can damage instrument surfaces. Bloody instruments should not soak in
a basin of solution for a prolonged period. d. Heavy instruments such as retractors should not
be placed on top of tissue and hemostatic forceps and other clamps. Place them in a separate
tray. e. Reusable sharps should be kept separate from other instruments of the same or similar
size to prevent injury to instrument processing personnel. f. Keep instruments accessible for
final counts.
Dismantling the Instrument Table The scrub person breaks down the instrument table at the
end of the surgical procedure while wearing the gown and full PPE. This process may be delayed
and the scrub person and instrument table maintained as sterile for a short time if the patient is
                                               xxiv
    in critical condition. The breakdown should not be started until a critical patient is out of the OR
    and admitted to PACU. Some examples of when to wait before breakdown include cardiac,
    vascular, some neuro, multiple trauma, or other procedure or patient condition that could
    precipitate expedient return to OR for immediate surgical reopening. When the scrub person is
    assured that the patient will not return to the OR, the table breakdown can begin. Whether used
    or unused, all instruments on the instrument table are considered contaminated and must be
    promptly and properly decontaminated/cleaned, inspected, terminally sterilized, and prepared
    for subsequent use. Wearing gloves, a gown, a mask, and protective eyewear, the scrub person
    prepares instruments for the cleaning process. Instruments are cleaned in a designated
    instrument processing area, not in the OR. Key points in handling instruments when dismantling
    the instrument table include the following:
      Check drapes, towels, and table covers to be sure that instruments do not go to the laundry or
    into the trash. A final quick count is a safeguard. 2. Collect instruments from the Mayo stand
    and any other small tables, and collect those that may have been dropped or passed off the sterile
    field. 3. Separate delicate, small instruments and those with sharp or semisharp edges for special
    handling. 4. Disassemble all instruments with removable parts to expose all surfaces for
    cleaning. 5. Open all hinged instruments to expose box locks and serrations. 6. Separate
    instruments of dissimilar metals. Instruments of each type of metal should be cleaned separately
    to prevent electrolytic deposition of other metals. 7. Flush cold, distilled water through hollow
    instruments or channels, such as suction tips or endoscopes, to prevent organic debris from
    drying. 8. Rinse off blood and debris with demineralized distilled water or an enzymatic
    detergent solution. 9. Follow the procedures for preparing each instrument for decontamination
    or terminal sterilization. Procedures vary depending on the type of instrument and its
    components and on the equipment available and its location. a. Some air-powered instruments
    can be lubricated with a sterile lubricant after sterilization and just before use. b. Some
    manufacturers supply lubricant (usually a silicone based oil). c. Some instruments must be run
    after lubrication to disperse the lubricant through the mechanism.
     10. Wrap the instrument for sterilization. a. Most manufacturers supply sterilizing cases for
    powered equipment. These cases can be wrapped in woven or nonwoven material. b. The
    instrument must be disassembled. c. The sharp edges of accessories must be protected. d. Hoses
    or cords should be loosely coiled.




     Packing techniquesPackaging of Sterile Products
                                          129    Contents
    •    Why packing of sterile goods?
    •    Packaging concept for sterile products
    •    Primary packaging containing the product
                                                   xxv
•       Secondary packaging
•       Transport packaging
•       Validation of the packaging system
•       Requirements for the primary packaging
•       General guidelines for packaging practice
•       Packaging materials
•       Soft/flexible packaging materials
•       Textile sheets: cotton or linen
•       Paper sheets
•       Paper sterilization bags
•       Non-woven sheets
•       Laminated film pouches
•       Rigid packaging systems
•       Sterilizing drums
•       Sterilizing containers
•       Wrapping techniques for packaging using sheets
•       Accessories for packaging
•       Indicator tape
•       Trays and baskets
•       Protection materials
•       Dust covers
•       Workstation for packaging
•       Choice of materials and methods for packaging of sterile supplies (primary packaging)
•       Textile packs
•       Small quantities of textile and/or bandages/swabs
•       Instrument sets in trays/baskets
•       Individual instruments:
•       Bowls and trays (small)



               Bowls and trays (large)
               Catheters, tubing, hoses
               Scopes
               Fine surgical instruments (individual
                as well as in sets)
              Mammal prosthesis
         Normative references (European)




                                              xxvi
                         130    Why packing of sterile goods?
                           At the end of a correct sterilization process, products inside the
                           sterilizer chamber are sterile. The air in the room where the
                           sterilizer is installed contains dust particles, which may carry
                           micro-organisms. So when taking out the load from the
                           sterilizer, it soon will be contaminated again. In addition usually
                           sterile goods are stored for quite some time before they are
                           used, and moreover they are transported through the hospital to
                           the place they are to be used. It thus is obvious, that, when not
                           protected, the goods will definitely be recontaminated by the
                           time they are used.

                           The goods must be put in a packaging to prevent
                           recontamination after sterilization. At the same time the
                           packaging should be suitable for sterilizing the goods it
Packaging is essential for
                           contains!
maintaining sterility!
                           Moreover the packaging protects is content against damage
                           during handling and transport.




                                           xxvii
                          131    Packaging concept for sterile products

Depending on use, storage and transportation, a sterile product should be packaged in one or
more packaging layers:

                                      Primary packaging containing the product

                            The primary packaging prevents recontamination of the product
                            after sterilization. It should provide an effective microbial
                            barrier and it should allow passage of air and the sterilizing
                            agent, e.g. steam. A primary packaging is sufficient in situations
                            that there is no chance that dust is deposited on the pack. In a
                            dust free storage or in case of immediate use of the materials.
   An instrument set in its
                            The primary packaging maintains sterility during storage and
   primary packaging        transport. Examples of primary packaging: 2 layers of paper, 2
                            layers of non-woven sheets, single or double laminated film
                            pouch, paper bag or container with adequate filter(s).
                                      Secondary packaging

                            This second layer used to facilitate proper storage and internal
                            transport to user. It may contain one or more primary packages.
                            E.g. an extra, plastic wrapper, bag, cardboard box or container.
                            It may offer extra protection against dust and gives extra
   Disposable sterile items
                            mechanical protection, making handling easier. Commonly used
   in secondary packaging for disposable sterile supplies.

                                      Transport packaging

                                 A transport package is used for external transporting of sterile
                                 goods in their primary and secondary packaging. Usually it is a
                                 strong cardboard box, cradle, closed trolley or other type of
                                 container.

   Closed      trolleys    for When the goods enter the clean area, e.g. operating theatre, the
   external transport          transport packaging should be removed.

                           132     Validation of the packaging system

                                 It is essential that a packaging system with its content meet the
                                 requirements in terms of sterility maintenance and protection of
                                 its contents. That is why any packaging should be validated in
                                 combination with the actual load and the sterilization process
                                 used. When testing a packaging system, also handling transport
                                 and storage conditions should be considered! (see EN 868-1)
   Any combination of load,


                                                xxviii
   packaging            and
   sterilization     process
   should be validated.


                       133     Requirements for the primary packaging

When observing a packaging from the moment it is put around a product before sterilization until
the moment it is opened, just before use of its content, the requirements become clear:

      Enabling sterilization. The packaging should allow air that is in the pack to be driven out
       and the sterilizing agent to reach all surfaces of its content.
      Compatible with the sterilization process. The packaging should be able to withstand
       the conditions during the sterilization process such as pressure changes, high temperature
       and humidity
      Maintaining Sterility. After taking the product out of the sterilizer it should remain sterile
       during handling, transport and storage until use.
      Strong. It should be remain intact after any intended handling and shipping
      Ensure product integrity and patient safety. It should not release any chemicals or
       particles or affect the product in any other way, which may affect the quality of the product
       or which might endanger the patient on which the product will be used.
      Indicator. The packaging should bear a clearly visible marking indicating whether or not
       the product is sterilized.
      Facilitate aseptic opening and presentation. When opening a packed sterile product, the
       chance for recontamination of the product should be kept as low as possible. When taking
       the product from the packaging, recontamination should be prevented. In other words: the
       packaging should facilitate aseptic opening and presentation. This implies:
           o simple opening
           o when taking out sterile objects form the packaging, it should not be possible to
               touch the unsterile outer side of the packaging.
      Visible that it was opened. Opening should result in a clearly visible indication that the
       pack was opened.

                        134     General guidelines for packaging practice
      If in a health facility more than one sterilization methods are used, the accidental exchange
       of packaging materials shall be prevented. The packaging should have an indication
       showing clearly for which sterilization method it should be used.
      Reusable medical supplies that are to be re-sterilized (e.g. due to passing of the expiry date
       of a pack, or because of damaged packaging), should inspected, where necessary cleaned
       and repacked. Textile should be reconditioned.
      The content of a pack, which was opened by mistake, should be considered as non-sterile.
       It should be made clearly visible that a package was opened. E.g. by clearly damaging the
       packaging material. The content of such pack shall be inspected and when necessary,
       cleaned. It then is repacked and sterilized.




                                                xxix
                                  135       Packaging materials

A wide range of materials used for packaging of sterile supplies are available.

Traditionally, packaging materials for sterile supplies were reusable, such as sterilizing drums
and cotton ware. Due to their inadequate microbial barrier, most of these traditional materials do
not meet the requirements for primary sterile packaging anymore. They may still play a role as
mechanical protection or additional dust protection layer. At the moment non-wovens, laminated
film pouches, paper bags and containers are used as primary packaging materials. The following
is an overview of packaging materials in use in sterile supply:

      Soft/flexible packaging materials
                                        Textile sheets: cotton or linen

                                 Use: Inner wrapping of instrument sets or outer dust protection

                                 Textile alone is not suitable as primary packaging!

                                 Cotton sheets have long been the standard packaging material
                                 for sterile goods. It has some major advantages

                                         Textile always has been a very common and well known
                                          hospital commodity
                                         Strong
                                         Well drapable and convenient in use
                                         Can be reused.

                              The openings between the threads however are larger then
                              most micro-organisms and thus the fabric does not provide an
                              adequate microbial barrier. It therefore does not meet the
    Packaging in cotton still requirements anymore as primary packaging for sterile goods.
    being used in health They however are still often used as an inner wrapping for
    facilities with limited protection or as an outer dust cover.
    resources
                              Whenever textile is used, it should contain its natural
                              humidity. (It should be conditioned). If textile is too dry it may
                              cause overheating of the steam and thus cause a failing
                              sterilization.




                                                 xxx
                                    Paper sheets

                            Use: Primary packaging for wrapping of textile packs and
                            instrument sets in trays. Also used as inner packaging in
                            containers

                            Paper was the first alternative that replaced textile. It has a
                            smaller pore size then textile. And thus can be used as primary
                            packaging. Smooth papers are used for inner packaging,
                            whereas crepe paper is stronger and is rough. Crepe paper can
                            be used for inner and outer packaging.

                          During sterilization, steam penetrates through the packaging.
                          When paper is wet, it looses much of its original strength.
                          Therefore stress in paper should be prevented. Wrapping
Paper sheets available in should not be too tight, but also not too loose. It is essential
many sizes and strengths that drying is adequate.

                            Paper sheets are for single use only.

                                    Paper sterilization bags

                            Use: For packaging of individual instruments or small sets
                            used in nursing stations and wards.

                            Closing is usually done in a sealing device.

                            Disadvantages:

                                     They are not very strong
                                     Opening is not convenient: tearing or cutting
                                     They do not facilitate aseptic opening.
                                     You cannot see what is inside
Paper sterilization bags    Aseptic presentation can be improved by putting instruments
                            in the bag with the handle at the opening end. It is not
                            convenient to take out instruments from the bag. Its use has
                            decreased with the introduction of laminated film pouches.

                            Paper sterilization bags are for single use only




                                             xxxi
                                   Non-woven sheets

                           Use: Primary packaging for wrapping of textile packs and
                           instrument sets in trays. Also used as inner packaging in
                           containers

                         Non-wovens contain a certain amount of synthetic fibers.
Non-woven        wrapper Added may be inorganic, textile, cellulose or other kind of
                      synthetic fibers. These fibers of different materials are joined
                      together, by for example pressing and heating. This means that
                      the fibers are not woven together, but sealed together. For
                      sterilization special non-wovens have been developed to meet
                      the requirements for the primary packaging of sterile goods.
Non-wovens are water-
                      They combine the good characteristics of other packaging
repellent             materials:

                                    Very strong
                                    Well drapable
                                    Allow air removal and penetration of the sterilizing
                                     agent
                                    Very small pores, thus efficient microbial barrier
                                    Virtually lint-free; free of particles and loose fibers
                                    They repel liquids (hydrophobic) Fluids are not
                                     absorbed into the fabric.
                                    Various non-woven materials are available for a range
Packaging an instrument              of applications in the sterilization department: extra
set in a non-woven sheet             softness, extra strong, etc.
using the parcel fold
                           Non-woven sheets are for single-use only

                                   Laminated film pouches

                           Use: Primary packaging for individual instruments or small
                           instrument sets.

                           They were the follow up of paper sterilization bags. The
                           pouches consist of a sheet of paper or non-woven and a sheet
                           of laminated transparent plastic, which are sealed together. The
Typical   laminated   film film cannot be penetrated by steam or air. Removal of air and
                           penetration of steam is through the paper/non-woven. The
pouch
                           pouch is opened by peeling back the laminated sheet from the
                           paper sheets, like opening a banana.

                           Pouches are available in many sizes. The open end of the
                           pouch is closed with a sealing device. It is essential that the



                                           xxxii
                             sealing temperature and pressure are adjusted well in order to
                             get an adequate seal.

                             Also laminated film packaging is available on roll. The user
                             can cut pouches to any size needed. In that case both sides
                             need to be sealed by the user.

                             Remarks

                                     The peel-open system assures dust-free aseptic opening
                                      an presentation.
Laminated film pouches in            The pouch should be such that when peeling it open, not
various sizes and on roll             the paper nor the laminate will tear. It should open neatly
                                      along the seals.
                                     It should not release fibers or fluffs.
                                     The content is clearly visible.
                                     It should not possible to reseal the pouch, when opening
                                      by mistake.
                                     A sterilizer indicator should be on the pouch indicating
                                      whether a product was processed.
                                     The content should not be tightly surrounded by the
                                      packaging material; it should be able to move freely
Sealing device for pouches            inside the pouch.
                                     Sterilization pouches should be put upright in a grid
                                      basket or container and not too tight together, such that
                                      a hand can slide in between them.
                                     Laminated film pouches are for single use only.
                                     When packaging in dual laminated pouches, make sure
                                      that the paper of both packages are on the same side. The
                                      inner pouch should fit freely in the outer pouch!

  Rigid packaging systems


                                    Sterilizing drums

                             Use: As secondary packaging layer: mechanical protection of
                             its content

                             Not suitable as primary packaging.

                             In the past, most sterilizers had vertical, round chambers. For
                             various chamber sizes, drums were available. To allow steam
                             into the drum, the wall is perforated. A metal band around the
                             drum can be shifted in order to open and close the perforations.
                             Before sterilization they are opened. After sterilization the
Sterilizing drums are only

                                            xxxiii
suitable as additional perforations are closed again. They are known as
mechanical     protection Schimmelbush drums and were widespread.
(secondary packaging)
                          Problems:

                                    The band is closed after sterilization and thus the content
                                     may be recontaminated immediately after sterilization.
                                    The band does not provide an adequate closure, thus
                                     contaminated air may be sucked inside the drum. Also
                                     the lid closure does not provide a proper seal.
                                    Most modern autoclaves have horizontal, rectangular
                                     chambers. Round drums are then very inefficient in
                                     using the sterilizer space.
                                    The drums have hinged lids, hindering aseptic opening.

                            Therefore they are not suitable as primary packaging. They
                            may only be used as an extra mechanical protection.

                                   Drums with filters in top and bottom

                            Drums are available with filters in the lid and bottom. They
                            can be considered as sterilizing containers for round, vertical
                            autoclaves.

                                   Sterilizing containers

                            Use: Primary packaging of textile packs and instrument sets in
                            trays.

                            Well designed sterilizing containers offer the following
                            features:

                                    Air removal and steam access through filters or valves.
                                     They ensure maintenance of sterility during storage.
Loading a sterilizer with           For autoclaves with downward displacement processes
containers                           containers are available with filters in the lid and bottom.
                                    The sizing of most container systems is based on the
                                     Sterilizing Unit (1 StU =30cmx30cmx60cm). Thus they
                                     fit in sterilizers, instrument washer disinfectors, and are
                                     compatible with packaging materials, that are also based
                                     on this unit.
                                    The lid is removed completely from the bottom part thus
                                     facilitating aseptic opening
                                    They provide an effective mechanical protection during
Sterilizing     container            handling and transport
                                    They can be stacked. However stacking should not
                                     hinder steam penetration, nor cause entering of
                                           xxxiv
                                         condensate dripping down from higher containers.
                                         Proper drying is to be confirmed.
                                        Grid baskets can be stacked inside containers.
                                        Labeling system offers clear identification of the
                                         content, production data etc.
                                        A tamper protection device shall give clear indication
                                         whether a container was opened

                           Depending on the sterilizer process, containers shall be used
    Taking out a tray from with filters in top and bottom (for downward displacement
                           process) or containers with filters only in the top (fractionated
    container
                           prevacuum process).

                   136     Wrapping techniques for packaging using sheets

When opening a pack containing sterile materials, it is essential that, due to the act of opening,
the content is not contaminated. Wrapping techniques for packs and sets have been developed
which assures this aseptic opening. The most common wrapping techniques that are applied for
packaging of textile packs and instrument sets are the envelope fold and the parcel fold. The
unfolded wrapper covers the instrument table and thus provides a sterile field. The techniques
can be used for sheets of textile, paper and non-wovens.


   11. Sterilize the instrument in steam unless contraindicated by the manufacturer.
  Types of Sterilization methods
  Dry Heat Sterilization
  Dry heat in the form of hot air is used primarily to sterilize anhydrous oils, petroleum products,
  and talc, which steam and ethylene oxide gas cannot penetrate. The destruction of microbial life
  by dry heat is a physical oxidation or slow burning process that involves coagulating the protein
  in cells. Higher temperatures are required in the absence of moisture because the
  microorganisms are destroyed through a very slow process of heat absorption by conduction.
  Dry heat sterilizers are not commonly found in the OR processing areas. Dry heat is commonly
  used in dental suites. Advantages of Dry Heat Sterilization
   Hot air penetrates certain substances that cannot be sterilized by steam sterilization or another
  method.
  Dry heat is a protective method of sterilizing some delicate, sharp, or cutting-edge instruments.
  Steam may erode or corrode cutting edges. Disadvantages of Dry Heat Sterilization
   A long exposure period is required, because hot air penetrates slowly and possibly unevenly.
  The time and temperature required will vary for different substances.
   Overexposure may ruin some substances.
   Types of Dry Heat Sterilizers
  Mechanical Convection Oven. The most efficient and reliable dry heat sterilizer is an electrically
  heated, mechanical convection hot air oven. A blower forces hot air in motion around items in
  the load to hasten the heating of substances and to ensure a uniform temperature in all areas of

                                                xxxv
the oven. Early models operated at 320° F to 340° F (160° C-171° C) for 1 to 2 hours. Faster
portable tabletop models are available; these run at 375° F to 400° F (190.5° C-204° C), with
total cycle times of 6 minutes for unwrapped items and 12 minutes for wrapped ones. Optional
cooling chambers are also available. Gravity Convection Oven.
A conventional gravity displacement steam sterilizer chamber can be used for dry heat
sterilization. Heat is provided by steam in the jacket only; this heat may not be evenly distributed
throughout the chamber. The hot air rises initially and by gravity displaces cooler air at the
bottom of the chamber. The maximum temperature that can be obtained is 250° F (121° C) or
270° F (132° C) in a high-pressure gravity displacement sterilizer. To ensure adequate heat
conduction through all items, the exposure period is a minimum of 6 hours and preferably
overnight.
Loading the Sterilizer When loading a dry heat sterilizer, it is necessary to allow space between
the items and along the chamber walls so the hot air can circulate freely. The chamber is never
loaded to full capacity. Timing the Load. The time of exposure in a dry heat sterilizer varies
depending on the characteristics of individual items, the layer depth in containers, and the
temperature in the sterilizer. The timing of exposure begins when the thermometer registers the
desired temperature. Items are exposed for the following minimum periods, assuming the
amount in each container is kept to a minimum and the sterilizer is loaded according to the
manufacturer’s recommendations:
           6 minutes at 400° F (204° C), unwrapped
           12 minutes at 375° F (190.5° C), wrapped
           1 hour at 340° F (171° C), wrapped or unwrapped
           2 hours at 320° F (160° C), wrapped or unwrapped
           3 hours at 285° F (140° C), wrapped or unwrapped
           6 hours at 250° F (121° C), wrapped or unwrapped Biologic Testing of the Dry
           Heat Sterilizer Biologic indicators with endospores of atrophaeus are used to
              monitor the dry heat process. Commercially prepared endospore strips in glassine
              envelopes should be used. Each load should be tested and the items quarantined
              until negative results are confirmed.
Chemical Sterilization
The only chemicals used for sterilization are those that are registered as a sterilant by the EPA.
They may be approved for use in either a gaseous, plasma, or liquid state.
Ethylene Oxide Gas Sterilization Ethylene oxide (EO) gas is used to sterilize items that are
sensitive to heat or moisture. EO or EtO is a chemical alkylating agent that kills microorganisms
(including endospores) by interfering with the normal metabolism of protein and reproductive
processes, resulting in cell death. Used in the gaseous state, EO must have direct contact with
microorganisms on or in the items to be sterilized. EO is the most regulated sterilization process
in the United States. EO is highly flammable and explosive in air and therefore must be used in
an explosion-proof sterilizing chamber in a controlled environment. The machine is equipped
with alarms and will automatically lock if a malfunction occurs. When handled properly, EO is
reliable and safe for sterilization, but the toxic emissions and residues of EO present health
hazards to personnel and patients.

                                              xxxvi
Advantages of EO Gas Sterilization
     1. EO gas is an effective substitute agent to use with most items that cannot be sterilized
    by heat, such as plastics with low melting points.
     2. EO gas provides an effective method of sterilization for items that steam and moisture
    may erode; it is noncorrosive and does not damage items.
     3. EO gas completely permeates all porous materials; it does not penetrate metal, glass,
    and petroleum-based lubricants. EO gas sterilization is not recommended for oils, liquids,
    and powder (including talc). Solutions in glass ampules can be sterilized in EO because
    the gas does not penetrate glass. But a glass vial with a rubber stopper must not be put in
    the sterilizer because the gas will penetrate the rubber and may react with the drugs in
    solution, causing a potentially harmful chemical reaction.
     4. Automatic controls preclude human error by establishing proper levels of pressure,
    temperature, humidity, and gas concentration. The sterilizer is operated according to the
    manufacturer’s instructions.
     5. EO gas leaves no film on items.
     6. EO gas sterilization is used extensively in the preparation of commercially available,
    packaged, presterilized items because packaging materials that prolong storage life can be
    used.
    Disadvantages of EO Gas Sterilization
     1. EO gas sterilization is a complicated and long process that is carefully monitored.
    2. EO sterilization takes longer than steam sterilization; it is a long, slow process.
     3. EO gas requires special, expensive equipment. Gas is somewhat expensive per cycle.
     4. Items that absorb EO gas during sterilization, such as rubber, polyethylene, or
    silicone, require an aeration period (Table 18-4). Air admitted to the sterilizer at the end
    of the cycle only partially aerates the load.
     5. Toxic byproducts can be formed in the presence of moisture droplets during the
    exposure of some plastics, particularly polyvinyl chloride.
     6. Repeated sterilization can increase the concentration of the total EO residues in
    porous items. These increased levels can be hazardous unless the gas can be dissipated.
     7. EO is a vesicant when in contact with skin and mucous membranes. a. Liquid EO
    may cause serious burns if not removed immediately by thorough washing. b. Gloves
    made of neoprene, polyvinyl fluoride, nitryl or butyl rubber, or other material known to
    be impermeable to EO penetration should be worn for handling sterilized packages before
    aeration. If thick cotton gloves are worn, they should be placed in the aerator between
    uses. c. Personnel who wear contact lenses, especially soft lenses, should wear protective
    goggles when working around EO sterilizers to avoid eye irritation.
     8. Inhaled EO gas can be irritating to mucous membranes. It is a colorless gas, but its
    presence is easily detectable by odor. Overexposure causes nasal and throat irritation.
    Prolonged exposure may result in nausea, vomiting, dizziness, difficulty breathing, and
    peripheral paralysis. a. Immediately after the completion of each cycle, the sterilizer door
    should be opened approximately 2 inches and the area cleared of all personnel for 15
    minutes before unloading. b. Loading carts should be pulled, not pushed, from the
                                            xxxvii
sterilizer to the aerator. Air currents flowing over the load may accumulate a residual gas
that could be inhaled.
 9. Long-term exposure to EO is known to be a potential occupational carcinogen,
causing leukemia. It is also a mutagen,
Causing spontaneous abortion, genetic defects, chromosomal damage, and neurologic
dysfunction. a. The standards of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration
(OSHA) limit an employee’s exposure to ethylene oxide to 1 part per million (ppm) of air
averaged over an 8-hour period to an active level of 0.5 ppm, and to a short-term limit of
5 ppm averaged over a 15-minute period. These exposure limits are referred to as
permissible exposure limits (PELs). The short-term limit addresses exposure to bursts
of gas, such as when opening a sterilizer. Breathing zone sampling is performed daily
throughout an 8-hour shift on at least one employee for each job classification of exposed
personnel. Passive dosimeter badges are the most popular monitoring devices for
personnel. Chromatographs and other types of detectors are used for continuous gas
analysis of the environment. b. EO gas is vented from the sterilizer to the outside
atmosphere to avoid personnel exposure. Audible and visual alarm systems should be
installed to indicate a failure in the ventilation system. Most sterilizers have an exhaust
hood over the sterilizer door. c. The sterilizer door has locking and sealing mechanisms.
The integrity of the seals is checked regularly. Automatic controls must function properly
so the door cannot be opened until the gas is evacuated from the chamber. Types of EO
Gas Sterilizers the capacity of EO chambers varies from approximately 2 ft (57.5 L)
 in a tabletop size of 12 × 12 × 24 inches (30 × 30 × 60 cm) to very large floor-loading
units that are 28 × 67 × 78 inches (72 × 180 × 198 cm). These chambers automatically
control gas concentration, temperature, humidity, and time. Most models have vacuum
pumps to evacuate air from the chamber and steam ejectors to humidify and increase
temperature. Microcomputer controls and digital printouts of cycle parameters provide
evidence of proper operation. A purge cycle follows the timed gas-exposure cycle to vent
the chamber of airborne residual gas.
Ozone Gas Sterilization
 Ozone sterilizes by oxidation, a process that destroys organic and inorganic matter. It
penetrates the membrane of cells, causing them to explode. Ozone has been used to
purify water since the early twentieth century. Ozone is a metastable gas that can be
generated easily from oxygen and water at the point of use. No special outlet or water
supply is required. No special cartridges or canisters of a chemical are needed. This is a
low-temperature method of sterilization that has been in use in industry for more than 100
years. Safety of ozone gas exposure is measured in PELs. OSHA has set limits as 0.1
ppm per 8-hour period. The PEL is not to exceed 0.3 ppm/15 minutes. Severe pulmonary
edema will result at levels of 0.3 ppm exposure for 30 minutes. Personnel using ozone
sterilization do not encounter the gas in its intact state. The gas is converted back to water
and oxygen at the end of the cycle before the unit can be opened. There is only one
setting for all cycles, so the risk for error in operating the machine is minimized. The
process takes approximately 1 hour. The FDA has cleared ozone sterilizers for use on
                                        xxxviii
plastic, metal, and some rigid lumens. Cellulose packaging cannot be used. Nonwoven
pouches or vented closed container systems are used for instrumentation in ozone
sterilizers. Ozone sterilization technology was developed in Canada by TSO3 Inc. and
approved for sale in 2005.
The sterizone system, marketed by Skytron, operates just above room temperature at
87.4° F to 97° F (30.8° C-36° C) and is safe for heat-sensitive instrumentation. (More
information can be found at www.tso3.com.) The ozone sterilizer works in four phases
over a period of 4.5 hours:
 • Cold water vapor is humidified. About 75 mL per load. O2 is electrically charged to
create O3, which is ozone. Ozone has a bluish color.
 • The water vapor and O3 combine in the chamber. One oxygen atom is released from
the O3 molecule to combine with and deactivate microorganisms.
 • The water vapor, ozone, and free oxygen molecule are vented into a catalytic converter
that separates out the water and oxygen (H2O and O2) for discharge into the drain and
room air. Advantages of Ozone Gas Sterilization
 • The sterilizer generates its own agent using hospital-grade oxygen, water, and the
electrical supply. It is simple and inexpensive to operate.
• Ozone gas sterilization provides an alternative to EO gas sterilization of many heat- and
moisture-sensitive items.
 • Ozone gas sterilization does not affect anodized aluminum, titanium, chromium,
silicone, neoprene, and Teflon.
 • Aeration is not necessary; ozone leaves no residue and converts to oxygen in a short
time.
 • Low temperature is safer for heat-sensitive instrumentation. Disadvantages of Ozone

Chemical Sterilants in Solution Liquid
 Chemical agents registered as sterilants by the EPA provide an alternative method for
sterilizing minimally invasive heatsensitive items if a gas or plasma sterilizer is not
available or the aeration period makes EO gas sterilization impractical. Items processed
for patient care are categorized as critical, semicritical, and noncritical according to the
Spaulding classification system. Items that enter tissue or the vascular system are
considered critical and must be sterile. Items are sterilized with a liquid sterilant by
immersing them in solution for the required time specified by the manufacturer to be
sporicidal (i.e., to kill endospores). All chemical solutions have advantages and
disadvantages, and each sterilant has specific assets and limitations. (Additional
information is available at www.fda.gov.) Policies and procedures should be in place to
regulate and guide the use of chemical sterilants in solution. PPE should be worn and
eyewash stations should be conveniently located near the point of use. Advantages of
Chemical Sterilants
     The solution has a low surface tension; it penetrates into crevices and is readily
         rinsed from items.

                                        xxxix
             It is noncorrosive, nonstaining, and safe for instruments that can be immersed in a
              chemical solution.
           It does not damage lenses or cement on lensed endoscopes.
           It is not absorbed by rubber or plastic.
           It has low volatility and is stable for the time specified by the manufacturer.
              Disadvantages of Chemical Sterilants
           Prolonged exposure to a chemical sterilant may be necessary for sterilization.
           Some chemical sterilants have hazardous effects associated with exposure.
           Even if a chemical has low toxicity and irritation, items must be thoroughly rinsed
              in sterile distilled water before use.
           Failure to adequately rinse an endoscope can cause a chemically induced colitis.
           Sterile transfer is difficult, because items are wet.
           Chemically sterilized items cannot be held in long-term sterile storage. They must
              be processed for immediate use.
The solution can become diluted during use if an item is wet when placed in it. Types of
Chemical Sterilants In addition to EPA registration, chemical sterilants are approved by the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) as a method of sterilization for critical items that are heat
sensitive and can be immersed. The manufacturer is responsible for providing processing
instructions on the container label, and the user is obligated to follow the instructions. All
solutions should be tested before use with an appropriate test strip to validate the concentration
of the sterilant. This is the only way to know if the chemical will be effective.
Acetic Acid. Acetic acid mixed with peracetic acid and hydrogen peroxide kills microorganisms
by a process of oxidation to denature proteins in a process that takes 5 to 6 hours at a room
temperature of 77° F (25° C). The solution is commonly used as a sterilant for dialysis machines.
It is biodegradable and leaves no residue.
Formaldehyde. A 37% aqueous solution (formalin) or 8% formaldehyde in 70% isopropyl
alcohol kills microorganisms by coagulating protein in the cells. The solution is effective at
room temperature. Formaldehyde has a pungent odor and is irritating to the eyes and nasal
passages. Its vapors can be toxic.
Glutaraldehyde. According to the FDA, a 2.4%, 2.5%, or 3.4% aqueous solution of activated
buffered alkaline glutaraldehyde kills microorganisms by the denaturation of protein in cells.
The solution is activated by adding a powdered buffer to the liquid. Alkaline glutaraldehyde
solution changes pH and gradually loses its effectiveness after the date of activation. The
expiration date specified by the manufacturer is marked on the container when activated (e.g.,
14 or 28 days for aqueous Cidex–activated dialdehyde solution)..
Peracetic Acid.
 A proprietary chemical formulation of 35% peracetic acid, hydrogen peroxide, and water
inactivates critical microbial cell systems. Peracetic acid is an acetic acid plus an extra oxygen
atom that reacts with most cellular components to cause cell death. The mechanism may vary
with each type of cell (e.g., vegetative bacterial endospores, mycobacterium). The sterilant is
supplied in unit doses for each cycle and is diluted during the sterilization process to 0.2%
peracetic acid solution. During the 23-minute sterilization process, the solution is heated to 122°
                                               xl
F to 131° F (50° C-55° C) as it passes through the self-contained processing chamber. All items
and internal components of the STERIS 1E unit are submerged in the heated sterilant. On
completion of the sterilizing cycle, the sterilant is discharged into the sanitary drain. The used
chemical is not considered a hazardous material by the EPA. The instruments are automatically
rinsed in tap water that is passed through ultraviolet light, filtered through two external prefilters
and two 0.1-mm internal microfiltration systems. The smallest known bacterium, Pseudomonas
diminuta, is unable to pass through the pores in this filter system. (This is the same method used
by pharmaceutical manufacturers to make sterile injectable medications.) The STERIS 1E unit
uses a standard tap water supply, a sanitary drain, and a 110-V electrical connection. This
tabletop unit has a printout to document each cycle. Periodic maintenance includes filter changes
based on the chemical components of the external water supply. Biologic monitoring according
to the manufacturer’s recommendation is performed daily with a commercially prepared
endospore strip containing G. stearothermophilus. Hypochlorous Acid. Hypochlorous acid is
derived from electrochemical activation of a brine solution. Although technically a high-level
disinfectant (HLD), it kills many endospores on wellcleaned endoscopes and other heat-
sensitive items. This technique was approved in late 2002 by the FDA. Sterilox liquid chemical
HLD system is nontoxic and environmentally safe. This chemical is a nonaldehyde oxidation
material that kills endospores. The 10-minute process is a single-use design that requires a base
unit with inflows of water and electricity that connects to an endoscope processor. Salt tablets
(400 grain) and a water conditioner are added at the beginning of the cycle. No special handling
or precautions are required. Containers for Chemical Sterilant in Solution A large bin with a
perforated inner tray (nested) and lid is used with chemical sterilant solutions at room
temperature. With chemical sterilization, items are completely immersed and the lumens filled
with sterilant solution. The outside of the bin is labeled with the product name, date of activation,
date of expiration, and initials of the person who mixed the solution. The inside of the bin, inner
tray, and its lid should be kept sterile throughout the duration of use of that batch of solution.
The lid should remain on the bin to prevent evaporation of the solution and to minimize
vaporization of the solution. Evaporation changes the concentration of the mix and will alter the
sterilant properties. Formaldehyde and glutaraldehyde solutions are used in a well-ventilated
room. Preparing Items for Sterilization by Chemical Immersion Items should be clean and free
of organic debris and blood. Items should be washed thoroughly in a nonfilming soapy solution,
rinsed, and thoroughly dried before placing them in the chemical sterilant. Lumens should be
dried with jets of forced air. The solution will become diluted and lose effectiveness if other
solutions Instruments and equipment used in critical areas of the body must be sterile before
use. This means the instruments must be completely free of all forms of microorganisms.
Common methods of sterilization in the patient health care setting include: • High-temperature
steam • Ethylene oxide (EO) gas • Gas plasma sterilization • Peracetic acid processing •
Ozone • Dry heat • Ionizing radiation (used in commercial manufacturing of sterile goods).
This method is used outside the health care facility and commonly used for bulk sterilization of
equipment and supplies.
SELECTING A METHOD
 In the past, surgical technologists and nurses have been confronted with decisions about which
sterilization method to use for items such as wooden tongue depressors, petroleumbased gauze,
                                                xli
liquid in glass bottles, dry powders, and even surgical gloves. These products are now safely
sterilized by the manufacturer using technology such as cobalt-60 ionizing radiation. The
selection criteria for the modern perioperative environment have changed with advances in
technology and economics and with the increased focus on patient and personnel safety.
Whereas in the past “instrument nurses” were relied on to choose the correct sterilization method
for a given item, now the responsibility has been given over to the manufacturer. The enormous
variety of instruments and equipment used in surgery does not fit easily into a generalized
protocol for selecting a sterilization method. This complexity of methods also means that the
manufacturer’s recommendations must be followed exactly. These methods can also change
quickly when new models are marketed. For example, some endoscopic instruments must be
hand-cleaned and gas- sterilized, whereas others, even those with digital imaging capability, can
be safely sterilized by high pressure steam.
Parameters for sterilization
A method of sterilization is effective only when certain conditions are met. Microbial destruction
depends on the individual phases of the process itself and on the bioburden, virulence, and
resistance of the microorganisms.
 Time: Items must be exposed to the process long enough to destroy microorganisms. •
Saturation and surface exposure: All parts of the item must be exposed to the sterilization
process.
 Temperature: Some processes depend on the temperature to which the items are exposed.
Quality of the sterilant, air, and water: The agent must be pure, as must the air and water used
in conjunction with it. Chemical or elemental residue in water can reduce the efficacy of the
process.
 Presence of moisture: Humidity is necessary in most sterilization processes.
 Method of packing (where applicable) and loading the sterilizer: This is related to saturation
and exposure. Instruments and supplies that have multiple parts or complex design may require
disassembly before processing and wrapping. Items must be loaded in a manner that allows the
sterilant to penetrate all surfaces. The choice of packaging materials must be suitable for the
process.
The following bacteria are used according to the sterilization process: • Steam sterilization:
Geobacillus stearothermophilus • Dry heat and EO sterilization: Bacillus subtilis Hydrogen
peroxide gas plasma: Bacillus subtilis • Peracetic acid: According to the manufacturer’s
specifications • High-speed steam sterilizer: Geobacillus stearothermophilus enzyme
(fluorescence testing) • Ozone sterilization: Geobacillus stearothermophilus The test bacteria
are encased in a self-contained unit that usually is placed in the most challenging area of the
load—that is, near the outlet drain of the chamber (steam sterilizer). For EO monitoring, the
biological test pack is positioned in the center of the load. After the sterilization process, the
bacterial spores are cultured. The growth of bacteria in the test culture indicates that the
sterilization process probably was ineffective. If no bacteria grow, all items in the load are
presumed to be sterile. Biological controls should be administered at least once weekly in all
sterilizers and daily if possible. Biological monitors are always used when an artificial implant
or prosthesis is sterilized. If any biological indicator shows a positive result, all items included
in that load are withdrawn from use. The infection control department will be notified and the
                                               xlii
event documented. If the items have already been used in patient treatment, additional safety
precautions are immediately implemented, including notification of the surgeon or other primary
health care provider who used the items during patient care. Figure 11-13 shows examples of
biological monitors. Rapid biological monitoring uses an enzyme that binds to spores. After the
sterilization process, the level of enzyme is measured. This corresponds with destruction of the
bacterial spores. The monitoring system is used for both high pressure steam and EO
sterilization. Results can be obtained in 1 to 4 hours, depending on the sterilization process. Air
Detection Testing To test and monitor the efficiency of the high-vacuum steam sterilizer, a test
called the daily air removal test (DART) is performed. Bowie-Dick tests also are commercially
available for this purpose. High-vacuum sterilizers are monitored to detect air in the chamber
during the exposure phase. In these tests, a special package of properly wrapped towels is taped
with heat-sensitive chemical monitor tape and stacked to a height of 10 or 11 inches (25 to 27.5
cm). The package is then placed by itself in the sterilization chamber and run for the appropriate
time. An unsatisfactory DART indicates a failure in the vacuum pump system or a defect in the
gasket of the sterilizer door. Unsatisfactory results must be reported to the biomedical
engineering staff so that they can inspect the sterilizer, especially the vacuum system and door
seals.
Steam sterilization
Steam sterilization is the most widely used, effective, and efficient method of sterilization in the
health care setting. Normal atmospheric steam is not hot enough to completely destroy microbes
and spores. However, steam under pressure reaches the extremely high temperatures necessary
for sterilization. Steam under pressure coagulates the nucleic acids and protein that make up the
cell’s genetic and enzymatic material. Pressurized steam also destroys the cell’s resilient outer
wall and bacterial spores. Steam sterilization is achieved according to the temperature, pressure,
and exposure time. These depend on the type of steam sterilizer, the size of the load, the
temperature, whether items are wrapped, and the type of materials or supplies being processed.
The entire process of heating, pressurizing, and timing the load is called a cycle. Modern steam
sterilizers have preprogrammed cycles for these parameters. A steam sterilizer has a central
chamber where goods are placed and a mechanism for creating extremely high pressure. Steam
enters the chamber, air is removed, and the internal pressure increases. This process heats the
steam to the very high temperatures required for sterilization. The full cycle may differ slightly
among models and manufacturers. However, there are three distinct phases in all types of steam
sterilizers:
1. Conditioning (sometimes called preconditioning): Air is removed from the chamber and
replaced with steam.
2. Exposure or holding time: Goods in the chamber are exposed to superheated steam at a
precise temperature and duration. This duration depends on the size of the load, complexity of
materials being sterilized, and whether or not the items were wrapped before sterilization.
3. Exhaust and drying: Pressure in the chamber is reduced and the load is exposed to cool air.
Two types of steam sterilizers are used in the clinical setting, gravity displacement and dynamic
(also called prevacuum or high-vacuum sterilizers). The main difference in these types is the
actual process of removing air and replacing it with steam. The gravity displacement system
injects steam into the chamber and displaces the air, which escapes by gravity (downward)
                                               xliii
through a drain. Dynamic air removal sterilizers use a high-vacuum system to quickly and
forcefully evacuate air from the chamber and replace it with bursts or pulses of steam. Gravity
Displacement Sterilizer The gravity displacement sterilizer (also called a downward
displacement sterilizer) operates on the principle that air is heavier than steam.
All the air must be removed from the inner chamber, because all surfaces of the items must be
exposed to the pressurized steam to ensure sterilization. Any air in the inner chamber blocks the
passage of pressurized steam to the goods and prevents sterilization. The sterilizer is constructed
in such a way that air is displaced downward by gravity (hence the name gravity displacement
sterilizer) and is replaced by steam. Dynamic Air Removal (Prevacuum) Sterilizer The dynamic
air removal (prevacuum) sterilizer pulls air from the chamber with vacuum force and replaces it
with steam. As air is pumped into the chamber, steam enters in pulsed phases. Air is completely
removed with positive- and negative- pressure pulses. As the pressure increases, so does the
temperature of the steam inside the sterilizer. Superheated steam is possible only with extremely
high pressure. The chamber pressure and temperature are held according to the specified
program, then the steam is removed through a filter, and the chamber pressure is reduced to
normal (atmospheric) temperature. A cool cycle reduces the temperature to a level at which
personnel may safely handle the sterilized goods.
Selection of Items for Steam Sterilization Stainless steel instruments, other items made of
stainless steel, and woven materials are routinely sterilized with steam. However, many items
used in surgery cannot tolerate high pressure, high temperature, and exposure to steam. The
appropriate processing method should always be verified directly with the manufacturer’s
manuals or company representative. Many power-driven instruments and those that contain an
optical system or microprocessor cannot be steam-sterilized. Some synthetic materials, such as
Silastic, Teflon, polyethylene, polypropylene, and other complex polymers, may also be altered
during steam sterilization. Moisture Concentration (Steam Quality) Effective steam sterilization
requires a specific concentration of moisture. If too little moisture is present, items become
superheated and eventually can be burned. Too much moisture leaves items wet after removal
from the chamber; this can result in contamination of the item. The amount of moisture in the
steam is referred to as the steam quality. Water is converted to steam at 212° F (100° C). At this
temperature, steam is ineffective for sterilization. Steam that contains more than 97% water is
necessary for sterilization to be achieved. Water Quality although the water used during steam
sterilization is filtered, contaminants are still present. These usually consist of mineral particles
that are too small to be trapped by filters. These minerals are deposited on the surfaces of
sterilized items and on the internal surfaces of the sterilizers. The presence of orange, white,
brown, or black spots on sterilized items may indicate the presence of excess minerals in the
water supply. As these minerals become deposited in the box locks of surgical instruments, they
can impair the function of these instruments. Loading and Operation of a Large-Capacity Steam
Sterilizer Large steam sterilizers are used for bulk processing of hospital equipment, including
surgical instruments, basins, linen, drapes, and towels. They usually are located in the Central
Processing department. Loading techniques for any sterilizer influence the outcome. Large
sterilizers used for bulk linens, basins, and complex instruments multiply the problems of air
pockets, overheating, and proper steam drainage. Careful loading of items in the steam sterilizer

                                               xliv
is critical, because if the load is too dense or improperly positioned, air may become trapped in
pockets. Items in these air pockets will not be sterilized.
   Instrument pans with mesh or wire bottoms are placed flat on the sterilizer shelf.
   Linen packs, because of their density, require special attention. Linen packs are best
      sterilized by placing the packs on their sides.
   Packs and instrument trays should be placed so that they do not touch, or touch only
      loosely, and small items should be placed crosswise over each other.
   Heavy packs should be placed at the periphery of the load, where steam enters the
      chamber.
   Basins, jars, cups, or other containers should be placed on their sides with the lids slightly
      ajar so that the air can flow out of them and steam can enter.
   Any item with a smooth surface on which water can collect and drip during the cooling
      phase of the sterilization cycle should be placed at the bottom of the load.
      Modern steam sterilizers are preprogrammed for specific cycles that can be selected by
      the operator. Information about each load is stored in memory, and hard copies are
      maintained for quality assurance. The total time necessary to expose goods to pressurized
      steam and sterilize them depends on the density of the goods and the temperature in the
Flash (immediate-use) sterilizer
A high-speed prevacuum sterilizer is used in the operating room and in other areas of the hospital
to sterilize items for immediate use. Steam sterilization using an abbreviated cycle at a high
temperature is necessary for rapid sterilization. However, advanced technology leading to new
materials and complex equipment has led to equally complex guidelines for ensuring patient
safety. In the past, the term flash sterilization was used to describe the process of a shortened
sterilization cycle for uncovered items. Now, however, there are situations in which items are
covered in a variety of ways, even for immediate use following sterilization. A standards
committee composed of members of accreditation bodies, research professionals, and key health
professionals agreed in 2010 that the term flash sterilization does not reflect the complexity of
sterilization for immediate use. The term has been replaced with immediate-use sterilization.
Standards for immediate-use sterilization have been adapted by the Association of Surgical
Technologists as well as other professional organizations.
Ethylene oxide sterilization
Ethylene oxide (EO) is used to sterilize objects that cannot tolerate the heat, moisture, and
pressure of steam sterilization. It can be used for delicate instruments, including microsurgical
instruments and those with optical systems. It is highly penetrating, which makes it ideal for
complex instruments with delicate inner components. EO is a highly flammable liquid that when
blended with inert gas, produces effective sterilization by destroying the deoxyribonucleic acid
(DNA) and protein structure of microorganisms. EO is used in a 100% pure form, blended with
carbon dioxide gas, or mixed with hydrochlorofluorocarbons. EO kills microorganisms and their
spores by interfering with the metabolic and reproductive processes of the cell. The process is
intensified with both heat and moisture. The EO sterilizer operates at a low temperature. The
temperature of the gas directly affects the penetration of items in the chamber. Operating
temperatures range from 85° to 100° F (29° to 388° C) for a “cold” cycle and 130° to 145° F

                                              xlv
(54° to 63° C) for a “warm” cycle. Humidity is required to make spores less resistant to the EO
gas. The preferred moisture content for EO sterilization is 25% to 80%. The length of exposure
depends on the type and density of material to be sterilized, temperature, humidity, and
concentration of the gas. Precautions and Hazards A number of environmental and safety
hazards are associated with EO. Exposure to the gas can cause burns to skin and mucous
membranes. Prolonged occupational exposure to EO gas is known to cause respiratory damage.
EO is a stable compound with a long half-life. Its advantage as a penetrating sterilant also poses
hazards. It is difficult to remove, and the level of EO residue is not the same in different
materials. In addition, it reacts with many different substances, causing them to disintegrate or
creating other toxic compounds, such as ethylene glycol and ethylene chlorohydrins. These
chemicals also are difficult to remove from the environment. To prevent injury from EO
exposure, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) requires air sampling in
areas likely to contain high concentrations of EO. The level of EO must not exceed 0.5 ppm in
any area. Personal dosimeter badges measure EO exposure. Air samples should be taken
regularly in the sterilization area. Other safety precautions include the installation of an exhaust
system that vents the gas to the outside of the building through an exhaust vent located above
the chamber door. Six to 10 exchanges of fresh air per hour are delivered to the sterilization
area. Observing the following precautions reduces occupational and patient risk:
   After the sterilization process is finished, keep the sterilizer door opened slightly for
      about 15 minutes.
   Make sure goods transported from the sterilizer to the aerator (discussed later) remain on
      a transport cart.
   Always wear protective gloves when handling unaerated items.
   Never retrieve an instrument from the aerator before completion of the approved aeration
      period. Do not ask anyone else to do this, even if a surgeon requests it.
   Always pull the transport cart rather than pushing it. Pushing the cart places personnel in
      back of the air flowing from the unaerated items.
   Follow the manufacturer’s exact specifications for aeration. Preparation of Items for Gas
Sterilization all items to be gas-sterilized must be clean and dry. Any water left on equipment
bonds with EO gas and produces a toxic residue, which can cause burns or a toxic reaction in
those who come in contact with it. Any organic material or soil exposed to EO also may produce
toxic residues. Therefore, all items processed for EO gas must be completely clean. Items are
loaded in the sterilizer loosely so that the gas is free to circulate over every surface. Every
attempt should be made to load items that have similar aeration requirements. Some items must
not be gas-sterilized.
Self-assessment question
  1. What three conditions are necessary for any sterilization or disinfection process to be
      effective?
  2. Why are instruments processed in the washer decontaminator sterilizer?
  3. What is the purpose of wrapping instruments for steam sterilization?
  4. What disinfectant is approved for cleaning blood spills in the surgical suite?
  5. Why doesn’t a control monitor determine that sterilized goods are sterile?

                                               xlvi
 6. What is DART?
 7. Describe each of the three levels of the Spaulding classification system.
 8. What is immediate-use processing?
 9. What is terminal disinfection?
 10. Why are sterile packages given a lot number?

Case studies
Case 1
While scrubbed, you open a basin set and find a small amount of water pooled in the bottom of
the basin. What are the possible causes of this? What will you do?
Case 2
During the setup for a case, you notice that one of the indicator strips in a pan of instruments on
your back table has not changed color. What should you do?
Case 3
You are employed in a small community hospital. In your first week, you are scrubbed on a
laparotomy case. The circulator opens a single-use electrosurgery pencil that has been
resterilized with EO in the hospital’s Central Processing department. What will you do?
Case 4
You are the afternoon shift relief scrub on a plastic surgery case. About an hour into the case on
which you have relieved, you happen to notice the chemical sterilization monitor at the bottom
of the instrument tray, which is on the sterile back table. The monitor has not changed color.
The surgeon is using instruments from this tray. What do you do?
Case 5 You are about to scrub on an orthopedic case in which a stainless steel implant will be
inserted into the patient’s hip. The surgeon wants to see the implant before surgery. He opens
the package and examines it with bare hands. He then instructs you to flash-sterilize the implant.
What will you do? Who is responsible? What are the risks associated with flash sterilization of
implants?
Case 6 You have been assigned to work in the endoscopy room for the day. You will use
gastrointestinal endoscopes. When you arrive in the laboratory, you notice that the endoscope
to be used first is soaking in disinfectant solution that has expired (has been held beyond the
date approved for disinfection). The physician tells you that he will use the endoscope anyway.
What is your response?
Case 7 While opening sterile goods for a case, you find a basin set that has been wrapped in one
double-thickness wrapper. You are able to open the basin set using sterile technique. Is it sterile?

References
American Society of Cataract and Refractive Surgery and the American Society of Ophthalmic
Registered Nurses: Recommended practices for cleaning and sterilizing intraocular surgical
instruments,
Accessed July 24, 2011, at http://www.ncbi.hlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17883207#. AORN,
Standards, recommended practices, and guidelines, 2011. Association for the Advancement of
Medical Instrumentation: Comprehensive guide to steam sterilization and sterility assurance in
health care facilities. ANSI/AAMI ST79: 2006.
                                              xlvii
 Association of perioperative Registered Nurses: Recommended practices for environmental
cleaning in the surgical practice setting. In Standards, recommended practices and guidelines,
2007 edition, Denver, 2007, AORN.
Association of perioperative Registered Nurses: Recommended practices for sterilization in the
perioperative practice setting. In Standards, recommended practices and guidelines, 2007
edition, Denver, 2007, AORN.




Learning outcome 4: Store Operation Theatre instruments and apparatus
Storage of wrapped sterile goods
After an item has been decontaminated, sorted, wrapped, and sterilized, consideration must be
given to how the item can be kept sterile. Time-related sterility measures (based on the length
of time since sterilization) are not considered valid. Event-related sterility or terminal
sterilization is the accepted standard. Event-related sterility or terminal sterilization is based on
the principle that sterilized items are assumed sterile between uses unless environmental
conditions or events interfere with the integrity of the package. Guidelines for Storage Items
should be stored according to the following guidelines:
   Sterile items should be stored in areas that are separate from those used to store clean
      nonsterile items.
   Sterile items must never be stored near sinks or other areas where they can be exposed to
      water. Sterile items should be stored in critical areas or in the sterile core when possible.
      They should be placed in a draft free area away from vents and windows. The area must
      be dust- and lint- free.
   Closed cabinets are preferred to open storage areas.
   If items are stored in open bins, the bins or drawers should be shallow to prevent excess
      handling of the items.
                                               xlviii
     Mesh or basket containers are preferable to those with a solid surface where dust and
      bacteria can collect.
   Packages should be placed loosely on shelves to prevent crushing, tearing, or damage to
      items and wrappers.
   Heavy items must never be stacked on top of lighter ones. Stacking heavy instrument
      trays poses a risk that wrappers will be torn as the top tray is removed.
   Seldom-used items can be wrapped in protective dust covers.
   Wrappers should be inspected for damage and expiration before they are opened for use
   Items commercially prepared and sterilized by manufacturers may be considered sterile
      indefinitely as long as the wrapper is intact. An expiration date printed on the package
      shows the maximum time the manufacturer can guarantee product stability and sterility.
  Generalized Safety Factors for the Use of Electrosurgery
Electrical burn through the patient’s skin is the greatest hazard of electrosurgery. These burns
are usually deeper than flame burns, causing widespread tissue necrosis and deep thrombosis to
the extent that debridement and grafting may be required. Not all deep thermal injury is
immediately apparent. In addition to the precautions noted for preparing the ESU and for
positioning the dispersive return electrode used with monopolar units, other precautions should
be taken as follows:
 1. Electrosurgery (monopolar and bipolar) should not be used in the mouth, trachea, around the
head, or in the pleural cavity when high concentrations of oxygen or nitrous oxide are used.
During some procedures such as eye surgery, oxygen is administered via nasal cannula or mask.
Oxygen builds up under the drapes and sets the stage for a combustible situation. Flame-
retardant drapes can conceal a fire in a confined space.
 The anesthesia provider is advised to administer medical air instead of oxygen to minimize the
risk of fire. Safety regulations for use with all inhalation anesthetic agents are followed.
Electrocardiogram electrodes should be placed as far away from the surgical site as possible.
Burns can occur at the site of electrocardiogram electrodes and other low-impedance points from
invasive monitor probes if current diverts to alternate paths of least resistance. Metallic
electromyographic or neuro monitoring needles should not be used.
  Rings and other jewelry should be removed. Metallic jewelry, including those used in body
piercings, presents a potential risk of burn for the patient from diverted currents from the
monopolar unit with either an isolated or ground-referenced output.
 Flammable agents such as alcohol should be used with great care in skin preparation. If they
are used, the skin surface should be completely dry before draping.
 Volatile fumes and vapors may collect in drapes and ignite when the electrosurgical or cautery
unit is used.
  If another piece of electrical equipment is used in direct contact with the patient at the same
time as the ESU, connect it to a different source of current if possible. The cutting current of the
ESU may not work if another piece of electrical equipment is on the same circuit. The ESU may
interfere with the operation of some equipment, such as older models of cardiac monitors. The
isolated power system of solid-state generators may prevent these problems.


                                               xlix
New models of cardiac pacemakers are unaffected by monopolar ESU generators. Other
implanted electrical devices such as defibrillators could malfunction. Check with the device
manufacturer regarding compatibility. The bipolar ESU may be used because the current does
not pass through the patient’s body and return to the generator. The patient is continuously
monitored. A defibrillator should be on standby in the OR.
Connection of a bipolar active electrode to a monopolar receptacle may activate current, causing
a short circuit. Plugs on cords should be differentiated to prevent misconnections of active and
inactive electrodes. 8. Secure the active electrode handle in an insulated holster/ container when
not in use. Do not immerse an active electrode in liquid.
 To prevent fire, only moist sponges should be permitted on the sterile field while the ESU is in
use. This includes using moist sponges during the use of battery-operated electrocautery. Dry
sponges can ignite.
Investigate a repeated request by the surgeon for more current. The dispersive return electrode
or connecting cord may be at fault and should be checked first, followed by the handpiece
connection. Shock to those touching the patient may result. The patient may be burned at the
dispersive return electrode site.
For safety of the patient and personnel, follow instructions for use and care; these appear on the
machine or in the manual provided by the manufacturer that accompanies each ESU. Grasp and
pull only the plugs, not cords, when disconnecting attachments from the generator or the power
source. Position the power cord away from the team to avoid tripping team members. Avoid
rolling equipment over the power cord. Disposable cords should not be cut with scissors.
Any malfunctioning ESU should be labeled with the problem and taken out of service until
cleared for use by biomedical engineering department personnel.
The patient and personnel should be protected from inhaling plume (smoke) generated during
electrosurgery. A suction evacuator device should be placed as close to the source of plume as
possible to maximize evacuation of smoke and enhance visibility at the surgical site.
 Inspect insulated instruments for breaks in the insulation covering. Current can leak from
fractures in the insulation and create a thermal burn.
References
 1. Bourdon L: RP first look: New recommended practices for cleaning and care of surgical
instruments, AORN Journal 100(6):C1–C9, 2014. 2. Duro M: In focus: Factors that affect
surgical instrument availability and turnover time, AORN Journal 101(1):C7–C8, 2015. 3.
Seavey R: Immediate use sterilization: Moving beyond current policy, American Journal of
Infection Control 41(5):S46–S48, 2013.




                                               l
    Learning outcome 4: Store OT instruments and apparatus
    This learning outcome

    Storage of Operation Theatre instruments and apparatus

    Maintaining Operation Theatre instruments storage records
    Principles of Operation Theatre instruments storages
    Operation Theatre Storage methods, techniques and structures




                                     CHAPTER 11
              PROVISION OF POTT TECHNICAL TECHNICAL SERVICES
    Related Unit of Competency in Occupational Standard: Provide Perioperative Theatre
    Technical Services

    1.1 Introduction to the unit of learning

    This unit describes the competencies required to provide Perioperative Theatre Ttechnical
    Services which involves testing, Prepare to provide Perioperative Theatre Technical
    services,Perform Perioperative Theatre Technical services,Evaluate Perioperative Theatre
    Technical services,Wind-up Perioperative Theatre Technical services.
    1.2 Summary of Learning Outcomes
                                               li
   1.   Prepare to provide Perioperative Theatre Technical services
   2.   Perform Perioperative Theatre Technical services
   3.   Evaluate Perioperative Theatre Technical services
   4.   Wind-up Perioperative Theatre Technical services
  1.2.1 Learning Outcome 1: Prepare to provide Perioperative Theatre Technical services
1.2.2 Introduction to the learning outcome
  Upon completion of this unit describes the knowledge, skills and attitudes required to prepare
  for Safety practices in Perioperative Theatre ,Standard operating procedures,Aseptic
  techniques,Perioperative     Theatre     layout,Perioperative    Theatre    instruments    and
  apparatus,Perioperative Theatre supplies,Types of surgeries,Decontamination,Basic anaesthesia
  ,Basic pharmacology in theatre and Perioperative Theatre ethics.
  Identification and reporting of faulty Operation Theatre apparatus
1.2.3 Performance Standard
           1. Protective gears are worn according to technical services to be offered
           2. Perioperative Theatre environment is prepared in accordance with standard
               operating procedure
           3. Required materials and apparatus are gathered according to the technical services
               to be provided
           4. Condition of the required materials and equipment is checked according to their
               user manuals and manufacturer’s instructions
           5. Theatre equipment and apparatus are arranged according to work place set up and
               standard operating procedures
           6. Identified problem of PT apparatus and equipment is reported according to
               workplace set up




  Definition of terms
  Disinfection: Disinfection describes a process that eliminates many or all pathogenic
  microorganisms, except bacterial spores, on inanimate objects
  Sterilization: the process of making something free from bacteria or other living
  microorganisms.

  Content to be covered
  Learning outcome 1: Prepare to provide Perioperative Theatre Technical services
  Safety practices in Perioperative Theatre
  Employers should introduce new members of staff to basic health and safety laws and principles.
  Nurse training incorporates awareness of specific legislation such as Manual Handling
  Operations Regulations 1992, Reporting of Injuries, Diseases and Dangerous Occurrences
  Regulations 1995, and Control of Substances Hazardous to Health 2002.


                                                ii
There are additional health and safety issues specific to theatres. During the perioperative period
several members of a multidisciplinary team may be present, together with occasional visitors,
who may possess varying degrees of knowledge, training and experience. All present have a
joint responsibility, within a relatively small and restricted area and surrounded by specialist
equipment and potential hazards, to work towards the successful completion of the patient’s
anaesthesia and surgery (Taylor and Campbell, 1999a).
Government initiatives such as the Essence of Care (DoH, 2001) have increased public
expectations of health care. The detrimental effects of wound infection, both economically and
with regard to patient morbidity, is well known. The role of decontamination as part of essential
control measures is also well documented (Waller, 2002). In the theatre environment, the
principles of decontamination and asepsis underpin many health and safety policies and
protocols, with the aim of avoiding the introduction and spread of infection.
Special consideration must be given to patients under general anaesthetic, as they are unable to
take care of their own safety needs or voice any concerns. Pressure area protection is a
fundamental aspect of nursing care and particular attention should be paid to this in theatres as
patients are incapable of moving at a time when additional risk factors are present (Hartley,
2003). Staff must ensure that visitors to theatres receive instruction in health and safety
procedures.
During the total perioperative period health and safety procedures apply to all those who are in
the theatre complex, including: All health care staff;Nurses and porters who collect and return
patients to the ward;Administration staff; Sterile service unit staff;Domestic/housekeeping
staff.Theatre preparation.To ensure efficient and safe running of the theatre list, it should be
managed by a designated person, usually the most senior. There should be sufficient staff on
duty, and they should all have a clear understanding of their role in the team, based on their
skills and abilities (Taylor and Campbell, 1999b).
All equipment should be tested before it is needed, and care should be taken with electrical
equipment so that cables do not present a trip hazard or run across areas where there is a risk of
fluids pooling. The heating should be set at a level that is safe and comfortable for patients and
staff (Parker, 1999).
Infection control
A meticulous theatre-cleaning regime is fundamental to preventing infection. Theatres should
be clean and dust free, ventilation systems must be in working order and doors must be kept
closed.
All items needed for the operation should be in place and an adequate supply of regularly used
items should be on hand to minimise movement to and from theatre during the operation (Taylor
and Campbell, 1999b). The theatre floor should be cleaned thoroughly every day, and floors and
surfaces should be damp-dusted between operations, ensuring any spillage of blood or body
fluids is removed (Gould, 2001). A cleaning agent of proven activity should be used, cloths
should be disposable and mop heads should be sterilised daily (Line, 2003).
Cleaning, disinfection and sterilisation
Reusable instruments should be processed according to local policy, along with theatre drapes
and reusable scrub gowns. Decontamination is defined by Waller (2002) as ‘the combination of
                                               iii
processes including cleaning, disinfection and sterilisation, used to make a reusable device safe
for further use on patients and handling by staff’. Miller (2002) suggests that the terms cleansing,
disinfecting and sterilisation are used synonymously when they have distinct functions .
Sterile field
This consists of the instrument trolleys, the scrub team and the draped patient. There must be a
wide margin of safety marked by an invisible wall at the trolley edges, which marks the barrier
over which non-sterile items should not cross.
An aseptic technique is essential and sterile items must be received from the circulating person
in a manner that does not contaminate the field. Any breaks in sterility or the sterile field should
be reported immediately to the scrub person so that the contaminated item can be isolated and
removed if possible (Taylor and Campbell, 1999a).
Instruments should be inspected by the scrub nurse and rejected if any visible sign of
contamination remains after the sterilisation process.
The spread of resistant bacteria such as methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)
and conditions such as variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) are well publicised by the media
and are of particular concern (Waller, 2002). Patients who pose a high risk of infection should
be left until the end of the case list and universal precautions strictly observed.
Protective clothing
Protective clothing protects theatre staff from potential infection from pathogenic micro-
organisms and prevents clothing becoming wet or soiled (Xavier, 1999). Any person who enters
a theatre should wear theatre pyjamas. Line (2003) explains that poly-cotton material allows
bacteria through its weave and is easily dampened. This presents a hazard to staff and patients
as body fluids can be absorbed and transferred.
The scrub practitioner wears a sterile, long-sleeved gown that is laundered after each theatre
case. With the introduction of new European Union rules regarding the testing of re-usable
materials it has been suggested that it will be increasingly common to use single-use gowns and
drapes that are designed to resist wetting, tearing and bacterial penetration and dispersal (Line,
2003).
Footwear and gloves
Outside shoes should never be worn in theatre. The hospital should supply non-slip, anti-static
theatre clogs or boots, which should be washed after each use.
Surgeons and scrub nurses who come into contact with sterile body areas wear sterile gloves
(often two pairs). They should be put on according to the local scrubbing-up policy, ensuring an
aseptic technique and taking care that the barrier system of gown and gloves is not broken where
the two meet (Line, 2003; Parker, 1999).
Although wearing gloves does not prevent accidental needlestick injuries, the DoH (1998b)
suggests that they help reduce the volume of blood to which the wearer is exposed. Clean gloves
should be put on by circulating staff before touching patients or any equipment, specimens, or
drapes that could be contaminated.
Theartre tecnitians must wash their hands after wearing gloves as bacterial growth increases in
the moisture that accumulates under them (Xavier, 1999). Concern has been raised over

                                               iv
sensitivity to latex, therefore gloves should be worn only when necessary and removed
immediately after completion of the task (Perry and Barnett, 1998).
Theatre hats and masks
Theatre hats are worn routinely, and prevent loose hair and skin from falling on wounds or
equipment (Parker, 1999). They are only fully effective if they cover the scalp and also the
forehead if the wearer has a fringe.
The surgical mask was introduced over a century ago. Its continued use is controversial as
evidence is not conclusive that wearing a mask reduces postoperative infection. Wearing a mask,
however, does protect the practitioner from contact with body fluids (Parker, 1999).
When removed, care should be taken to handle masks by the strings so as not to contaminate the
hands with any biological matter and they should be disposed of immediately (Perry and Barnett,
1998).
Sharps, swabs and instruments
It is recommended that counts of swabs, instruments (including scratchpads and diathermy tips),
and sharps (needles and blades) should be undertaken at strategic points during an operation.
This is to ensure no foreign body remains in a patient after closure of a wound (National
Association of Theatre Nurses, 1998).
The scrub practitioner is responsible for counting all items used in an operation before incision,
at first layer closure, and at skin closure. It is also standard practice to give a verbal report to the
surgeon at the end of the procedure to the effect that all sharps, swabs, and instruments are
correct (Pirie, 2004).
The count requires full concentration, should be audible, and should be carried out by two
people, one of whom must be qualified. Both people should sign the theatre register.
The initial count should be recorded before the operation begins and any items that are added
during the course of the operation should be recorded by the circulating nurse. All items counted
during the course of the operation should be recorded clearly on a dry-wipe board. Items
removed from the sterile field should be visibly deleted with a scoring line or cross (Pirie, 2004;
Taylor and Campbell, 1999a).

Each swab counted must be checked to ensure its radiopaque strip is intact. This is because, in
the event of a lost swab (or sharp, or instrument), the surgeon might request an X-ray to ensure
that it has not been left in the patient. Any item deliberately left inside the patient should be
clearly documented in the patient’s notes.
Every sharp object in a theatre should be regarded as a potential source of injury. Accepted
practices in the handling of sharps should be adhered to, for example avoiding manual re-
sheathing of needles, and disposing of sharps in containers that comply with the British Standard
7320.
Needles, blades or instruments should never be passed directly hand to hand, but should be
passed via a ‘neutral zone’, for example a receiver (Perry and Barnett, 1998). Needles and blades
should be mounted for use using the correct instrument, never the fingers. Any sharps injury
should be managed and reported to occupational health according to local policy.
Specialist equipment
                                                  v
Electrosurgery (diathermy)
Electrosurgical (diathermy) devices use high frequency electrical current to generate heat, which
can cut and coagulate body tissue (Brown, 2000). Diathermy may be used in either monopolar
or bipolar mode. The patient’s skin should be evaluated before and after diathermy use. Correct
use of equipment will ensure that skin integrity remains intact. The patient should not be in
contact with grounded metal objects as the provision of an alternative pathway for the electrical
current could result in a burn. Any metal parts of the operating table that could come into contact
with the patient should therefore be padded and jewellery and piercings should be removed
before arrival in theatre.
Monopolar mode
In monopolar mode the electrical current flows from the generator in the electrosurgery
apparatus to an active electrode, which is the surgeon’s tool. The current continues through the
patient to an adhesive dispersive plate (the return electrode) that is placed appropriately on the
patient’s body so that it is ‘earthed’ safely back to the electrosurgery unit, thereby preventing an
electrical burn. The return electrode should be placed over a vascular, muscular area to promote
electrical conductivity and to dissipate heat.
Shaving may be necessary as hair at the dispersive site prevents complete plate contact with
skin. The plate should not be placed over bony prominences (this can impede return current),
over implanted prostheses (there is a potential for overheating), over scar tissue or over areas
distal to tourniquets where adequate tissue perfusion cannot be guaranteed.
Bipolar mode
In bipolar mode both active and return electrodes are combined within the same instrument. One
prong of the bipolar forceps is active and the other is the return electrode. This system is safer
because the patient does not form part of the electrical circuit and therefore a dispersive plate is
not required. If the patient has a pacemaker, this is the system of choice to avoid a monopolar
current passing through the heart. However, the low power, low voltage waveform used with
this system means it is usually incapable of cutting (Wicker, 2000).
X-rays
Precautions should be taken to protect theatre personnel from the damaging effects of exposure
to ionising radiation, which are well understood compared with other occupational risks. In
accordance with the Ionising Radiation Regulations 1999, staff who work with ionising
radiation should limit exposure to no more than is reasonably necessary, and should exercise
reasonable care while carrying out such work.
Every employee who works with ionising radiation should make full and proper use of the
protective equipment provided. The number of people present in theatre should be limited to
those necessary for the procedure and those present must wear lead aprons. It is advisable for
pregnant women to avoid X-rays because radiation may cause foetal abnormalities (Smith,
2000).
Hazards from volatile liquids or gases
Theatre ventilation systems help to extract toxic gases that could lead to fatigue, nausea,
headaches and may play a part in a range of health problems including renal, hepatic, and neural

                                               vi
diseases (Pressly, 2000). Therefore any system-failure warning lights should be reported,
investigated and rectified promptly.
Parker (1999) states that the minimum requirement for air changes is 20 per hour in the actual
operating room and the sterile supplies room. The smoke produced when electrosurgical devices
are used contains toxic substances that present biological and chemical hazards, so extraction
systems should be used during procedures involving diathermy (Wicker, 2000).
It is advisable to avoid the use of flammable solutions with diathermy as there is the risk of
ignition. Methyl methacrylate is a volatile flammable liquid used in orthopaedic surgery to make
bone cement. The vapour given off on mixing may cause irritation of the eyes and the respiratory
passages or a general feeling of ill health. Anyone affected should leave the theatre immediately.
Soft contact lenses should be removed when methyl methacrylate is being mixed as they are
permeable to irritant vapours.
Inhalation anaesthetics may be gases or volatile liquids and require suitable equipment for
storage and administration. Gas cylinders used in theatre must be clearly labelled with the name
or chemical symbol of the gas on the shoulder of the cylinder and the valve. They should be
stored in a cool, well-ventilated room, free from flammable materials. No lubricant of any
description should be used on the cylinder valves.
Nitrous oxide, used in anaesthesia, can be dangerous to both patient and staff if used for a
prolonged period in an inadequately ventilated space. Side-effects can include megaloblastic
anaemia and the depression of white cell formation (British Medical Association, 2000).
Waste disposal
Parker (1999) explains that theatre design should incorporate a sequence of clean zones from
the entrance to the operating area, to allow easy movement of staff from one clean area to
another.
Conversely, waste and contaminated items should be removed through ‘dirty’ areas without
passing through clean areas. Body fluids collected in suction bottles should be treated with a
gelling agent and allowed to solidify before being double-wrapped to prevent leakage (see case
study, Box 2), as should waste tissue and bone fragments. All clinical waste (placed in yellow
bags) should be labelled with the date, theatre number and case number to allow traceability.

From an environmental point of view, machines are now available that use microwaves to make
used materials safe for disposal in landfill sites. Normal rubbish should be placed in black bags
and disposed of in landfill sites to avoid incineration and minimise air pollution.

Standard operating procedures

A Standard Operating Procedure is a document which describes the regularly recurring
operations relevant to the quality of the investigation. The purpose of a SOP is to carry out the
operations correctly and always in the same manner. A SOP should be available at the place
where the work is done"

Aseptic techniques
                                              vii
April 24, 2019 admin Latest surgery news 0




Figure 1

Definition of aseptic technique

Aseptic technique is a set of specific practices and procedures performed under carefully
controlled conditions with the goal of minimizing contamination by pathogens.

Purpose

Aseptic technique is employed to maximize and maintain asepsis, the absence of pathogenic
organisms, in the clinical setting. The goals of aseptic technique are to protect the patient from
infection and to prevent the spread of pathogens.

Often, practices that clean (remove dirt and other impurities), sanitize (reduce the number of
microorganisms to safe levels), or disinfect (remove most microorganisms but not highly
resistant ones) are not sufficient to prevent infection.

Asepsis and Sterile Technique

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimates that over 27 million
surgical procedures are performed in the United States each year.



Surgical site infections are the third most common nosocomial (hospital-acquired) infection and
are responsible for longer hospital stays and increased costs to the patient and hospital. Aseptic
technique is vital in reducing the morbidity and mortality associated with surgical infections.

Description

Aseptic technique can be applied in any clinical setting. Pathogens may introduce infection to
the patient through contact with the environment, personnel, or equipment.
                                              viii
Asepsis in the operating room

All patients are potentially vulnerable to infection, although certain situations further increase
vulnerability, such as extensive burns or immune disorders that disturb the body’s natural
defenses. Typical situations that call for aseptic measures include surgery and the insertion of
intravenous lines, urinary catheters, and drains.



Surgery Aseptic Technique

Aseptic technique is most strictly applied in the operating room because of the direct and often
extensive disruption of skin and underlying tissue. Aseptic technique helps to prevent or
minimize postoperative infection.

PREOPERATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCEDURES

The most common source of pathogens that cause surgical site infections is the patient. While
microorganisms normally colonize parts in or on the human body without causing disease,
infection may result when this endogenous flora is introduced to tissues exposed during surgical
procedures.

In order to reduce this risk, the patient is prepared or prepped by shaving hair from the surgical
site; cleansing with a disinfectant containing such chemicals as iodine, alcohol, or chlorhexidine
gluconate; and applying sterile drapes around the surgical site.

In all clinical settings, handwashing is an important step in asepsis. The “2002 Standards,
Recommended Practices, and Guidelines” of the Association of Perioperative Registered
Nurses (AORN) states that proper handwashing can be “the single most important measure to
reduce the spread of microorganisms.”

In general settings, hands are to be washed when visibly soiled, before and after contact with
the patient, after contact with other potential sources of microorganisms, before invasive
procedures, and after removal of gloves. Proper handwashing for most clinical settings involves
removal of jewelry, avoidance of clothing contact with the sink, and a minimum of 10–15
seconds of hand scrubbing with soap, warm water, and vigorous friction.

A surgical scrub is performed by members of the surgical team who will come into contact with
the sterile field or sterile instruments and equipment. This procedure requires use of a long-
acting, powerful, antimicrobial soap on the hands and forearms for a longer period of time than
used for typical handwashing.



                                               ix
Institutional policy usually designates an acceptable minimum length of time required; the CDC
recommends at least two to five minutes of scrubbing. Thorough drying is essential, as moist
surfaces invite the presence of pathogens. Contact with the faucet or other potential
contaminants should be avoided. The faucet can be turned off with a dry paper towel, or, in
many cases, through use of a foot pedal.

An important principle of aseptic technique is that fluid (a potential mode of pathogen
transmission) flows in the direction of gravity. With this in mind, hands are held below elbows
during the surgical scrub and above elbows following the surgical scrub. Despite this careful
scrub, bare hands are always considered potential sources of infection.

Sterile surgical clothing or protective devices such as gloves, face masks, goggles, and
transparent eye/face shields serve as barriers against microorganisms and are donned to maintain
asepsis in the operating room.

This practice includes covering facial hair, tucking hair out of sight, and removing jewelry or
other dangling objects that may harbor unwanted organisms. This garb must be put on with
deliberate care to avoid touching external, sterile surfaces with nonsterile objects including the
skin.

This ensures that potentially contaminated items such as hands and clothing remain behind
protective barriers, thus prohibiting inadvertent entry of microorganisms into sterile areas.
Personnel assist the surgeon to don gloves and garb and arrange equipment to minimize the risk
of contamination.

Donning sterile gloves requires specific technique so that the outer glove is not touched by the
hand. A large cuff exposing the inner glove is created so that the glove may be grasped during
donning.

It is essential to avoid touching nonsterile items once sterile gloves are applied; the hands may
be kept interlaced to avoid inadvertent contamination. Any break in the glove or touching the
glove to a nonsterile surface requires immediate removal and application of new gloves.

Asepsis in the operating room or for other invasive procedures is also maintained by creating
sterile surgical fields with drapes.

terile drapes are sterilized linens placed on the patient or around the field to delineate sterile
areas. Drapes or wrapped kits of equipment are opened in such a way that the contents do not
touch non-sterile items or surfaces.

Aspects of this method include opening the furthest areas of a package first, avoiding leaning
over the contents, and preventing opened flaps from falling back onto contents.

                                               x
Equipment and supplies also need careful attention. Medical equipment such as surgical
instruments can be sterilized by chemical treatment, radiation, gas, or heat. Personnel can take
steps to ensure sterility by assessing that sterile packages are dry and intact and checking sterility
indicators such as dates or colored tape that changes color when sterile.

INTRAOPERATIVE PRACTICES AND PROCEDURES

In the operating room, staff have assignments so that those who have undergone surgical scrub
and donning of sterile garb are positioned closer to the patient. Only scrubbed personnel are
allowed into the sterile field. Arms of scrubbed staff are to remain within the field at all times,
and reaching below the level of the patient or turning away from the sterile field are considered
breaches in asepsis.

Other “unscrubbed” staff members are assigned to the perimeter and remain on hand to obtain
supplies, acquire assistance, and facilitate communication with outside personnel. Unscrubbed
personnel may relay equipment to scrubbed personnel only in a way that preserves the sterile
field.

For example, an unscrubbed nurse may open a package of forceps in a sterile fashion so that he
or she never touches the sterilized inside portion, the scrubbed staff, or the sterile field. The
uncontaminated item may either be picked up by a scrubbed staff member or carefully placed
on to the sterile field.

The environment contains potential hazards that may spread pathogens through movement,
touch, or proximity. Interventions such as restricting traffic in the operating room, maintaining
positive-pressure airflow (to prevent air from contaminated areas from entering the operating
room), or using low-particle generating garb help to minimize environmental hazards.

Other principles that are applied to maintain asepsis in the operating room include: All items in
a sterile field must be sterile.

Sterile packages or fields are opened or created as close as possible to time of actual use.
Moist areas are not considered sterile.
Contaminated items must be removed immediately from the sterile
Only areas that can be seen by the clinician are considered sterile (i.e., the back of the clinician
is not sterile).
Gowns are considered sterile only in the front, from chest to waist and from the hands to slightly
above the elbow.
Tables are considered sterile only at or above the level of the table.

                                                xi
Nonsterile items should not cross above a sterile field.
There should be no talking, laughing, coughing, or sneezing across a sterile field.
Personnel with colds should avoid working while ill or apply a double mask.
Edges of sterile areas or fields (generally the outer inch) are not considered sterile.
When in doubt about sterility, discard the potentially contaminated item and begin again.
A safe space or margin of safety is maintained between sterile and nonsterile objects and areas.
When pouring fluids, only the lip and inner cap of the pouring container is considered sterile;
the pouring container should not touch the receiving container, and splashing should be avoided.
Tears in barriers and expired sterilization dates are considered breaks in sterility.



General    habits   that   help    to   preserve      a   clean   medical   environment      include:

safe removal of hazardous waste, i.e., prompt disposal of contaminated needles or blood-soaked
bandages to containers reserved for such purposes
prompt removal of wet or soiled dressings
prevention of accumulation of bodily fluid drainage, i.e., regular checks and emptying of
receptacles such as surgical drains or nasogastric suction containers
avoidance of backward drainage flow toward patient, i.e., keeping drainage tubing below patient
level at all times
immediate clean-up of soiled or moist areas
labeling of all fluid containers with date, time, and timely disposal per institutional policy
maintaining seals on all fluids when not in use
The isolation unit is another clinical setting that requires a high level of attention to aseptic
technique. Isolation is the use of physical separation and strict aseptic technique for a patient
who      either     has      a     contagious      disease       or     is    immunocompromised.
For the patient with a contagious disease, the goal of isolation is to prevent the spread of
infection to others. In the case of respiratory infections (i.e., tuberculosis), the isolation room is
especially designed with a negative pressure system that prevents airborne flow of pathogens
outside the room.
The severely immunocompromised patient is placed in reverse isolation, where the goal is to
avoid introducing any microorganisms to the patient. In these cases, attention to aseptic
technique is especially important to avoid spread of infection in the hospital or injury to the
patient unprotected by sufficient immune defenses.

Entry and exit from the isolation unit involves careful handwashing, use of protective barriers
like gowns and gloves, and care not to introduce or remove potentially contaminated items.


                                                xii
Institutions supply specific guidelines that direct practices for different types of isolation, i.e.,
respiratory versus body fluid isolation precautions.

In a multidisciplinary setting, all personnel must constantly monitor their own movements and
practices, those of others, and the status of the overall field to prevent inadvertent breaks in
sterile or clean technique. It is expected that personnel will alert other staff when the field or
objects are potentially contaminated.

Health care workers can also promote asepsis by evaluating, creating, and periodically updating
policies and procedures that relate to this principle.

Perioperative Theatre layout
The adaptive layout for operating theatre (ALOT) problem in hospitals seeks to determine the
‘most efficient’ layout placement of a set of health-care operating facilities, corridors and
elevators in a designated area subject to a set of constraints on professional standards.
Such standards include regulations on: hygiene, safety and security of stakeholders (doctors,
medical staff, patients and visitors); movements of technologies; and specifications of operating
rooms (functions, orientations, space sizes, and desired closeness). Existing ALOT layouts are
mostly generated from designs based on experiential judgments of experts.
 Due to the lack of scientific rigor and huge impact of layout design on the efficiency and
effectiveness of an operating theatre, the paper proposes mixed integer linear programming
models to find optimal layouts under three different design variants: ALOT with multiple
sections; ALOT with multiple rows and ALOT with multiple floors.
Each variant has different demands for personnel, patients, and technologies over a planning
horizon. Operating facilities can exchange functions at rearrangement costs from one period to
another to meet the changing demands.
The general objective consists of two sub-objectives: the first sub-objective is to minimize the
total sum of the rearrangement and travel costs whereas the second sub-objective is to maximize
the total sum of desired closeness among facilities. Computational experiences are presented on
a set of quasi-real data instances for a hospital in France. They demonstrate the effectiveness of
the formulations in providing optimal layouts for realistic-sized instances. Conclusion and future
research directions are presented.




                                               xiii
          Perioperative Theatre instruments and apparatus
operating room equipment list for operation theatre Surgical Lamp Light. It has the wall
mounted and Floor stand type,it shows the wall mounted type in the above picture. ...x-
ray machine. ...Surgical table bed. ...patient monitor. ...Trolley. ...Anaesthesia machine.
...Infusion pump. ...Pendant.




        •




                                           xiv
         Perioperative Theatre supplies




Operating rooms (ORs) are specialized workspaces that require highly functional equipment of
the highest quality, which surgeons and other OR personnel use to perform lifesaving
procedures.
Without this equipment in place, OR professionals may struggle to deliver the care that patients
need. There is a definite number of essential operating room equipment that OR professionals
need on a per case basis. Each piece of equipment serves a distinct purpose and makes it easier
for OR personnel to get the job done.
Here’s a closer look at some of the most common required OR equipment that serve the needs
of OR staff and patients everyday.
1. Utility Columns
Utility columns accommodate a variety of OR-administered services, ensuring better
management of workspace in an OR. The columns can also be retractable or fixed and provide
a viable solution for the distribution of communication units, electrical services and medical
gases in OR suites.
With utility columns, surgeons can access electrical devices that are pre-wired, along with
medical gas outlets that include a single point connection at the top of the unit.
The columns can even be integrated with a CO2 or nitrogen control panel to help surgeons
deliver better patient support. Utility columns can be raised or lowered with ease.
When a utility column is raised, it provides additional space; when the column is lowered, it
ensures that surgeons can hook up to various OR-administered services immediately.




                                             xv
2. Surgical and Exam Lights
surgical lights in the OR
Operating on a patient is challenging, and surgical lights empower medical professionals to work
to the best of their ability.




Picking top-of-the-line surgical and exam lights ensure these professionals can enjoy the benefits
of working in a well-lit OR at all times.
Many diverse surgical and exam lights currently are available, including:Ceiling-mounted
surgical lights: Ceiling-mounted LED and halogen lights are among the top options available to
brighten your OR.
Mobile surgical lights: Is your OR in transition? In a temporary room, or for a short-term
solution, you simply cannot go wrong with mobile lights. Mobile surgical lights are bright and
powerful, providing the ideal combination for just about any OR.
Surgical headlights: Light, bright and comfortable, surgical headlights provide surgeons with
extra illumination right at the spot they are investigating. These headlights are lightweight and
comfortable and will illuminate just about any space immediately. Adding first-rate surgical and
exam lights is necessary for an OR, regardless of a hospital’s size. With these lights at your
disposal, you’ll be better equipped to maintain a secure, productive work environment.
3. Stretchers and Stretcher Accessories
Transporting a patient from one room to the next?
You’ll be able to do so quickly and effortlessly if you deploy first-rate patient transfer stretchers
for your OR. Hospital stretchers are crucial for various surgical procedures, such as
ophthalmologic, bariatric and paediatric. They are designed to help patients remain comfortable
and accessible. Stretcher accessories can customize a patient transport stretcher into a specific
                                               xvi
use stretcher. For example, Meditek manufactured a paediatric enclosure accessory for its line
of QA3 stretchers, making the QA3 ideal for children with the combination of the enclosure
keeping them safe and the stretcher’s lowest height ability.
 4. Cushions and Mattresses
 Whenever a new patient arrives, you’ll want to be ready to ensure that he or she can receive
support in a plush or firm bed. Many cushions and mattresses are available that are designed to
assist patients of all ages and sizes.
ideal mattresses in the OR
Mattresses and cushions can be purchased as complete sets or as separate leg, head, or body
cushions. Two of the most common surgical table cushions include:
Standard Surgical Table Pads – As electrically conductive cushions, standard surgical table pads
feature a supportive urethane core and Lectrolite covering that is simple to clean. The cushions
also can help patients avoid bedsores and are ideal for patients during shorter medical
procedures.
Premium Sof-Care Deluxe Surgical Table Pads – For superior pressure management and
enhanced positioning capabilities, the Premium Sof-Care Deluxe surgical table pads represent
great options. The surgical table pads feature an electrically conductive four-way anti-stretch
cover for increased durability, fluid-resistant seams to reduce the risk of cross-contamination,
and other features that make the table pads valuable in an OR.
Selecting the right cushions and mattresses – and ensuring they are available to patients every
day – is crucial. With a dependable supplier of bedding at your side, you should have no trouble
finding the ideal padding for your OR.
5. Space Management Booms
An everyday OR can become a stressful place to work if there is limited space. In fact, stress
remains an ongoing problem among OR personnel, which is reflected in recent data. A study of
OR personnel published by the Thrita medical journal indicated 48 percent of nurses said they
experienced “work overload” that led to increased stress levels. Also, the study revealed OR
technicians usually experienced higher stress levels than other OR personnel. Physical
environment factors can affect a medical professional’s stress levels. Comparatively, space
management booms may help medical personnel conserve space, increase their productivity,
and minimize their stress levels simultaneously. Space management booms can be added to
almost any OR, regardless of size, and enable medical professionals to make the most of the
available space in this room.
6. Sterilization and Cleaning Equipment
No one wants to put themselves or their patients at risk of infection, and sterilization and
cleaning equipment is available that can make a world of difference for OR personnel and their
patients. To better understand the importance of sterilization and cleaning equipment in ORs,
let’s consider the results of a recent study on OR foot traffic conducted by Orthopaedics.
The study, which examined “the number and length of door openings during nearly 200 knee
and hip arthroplasty surgeries performed at Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical Centre over three
months,” showed excessive door openings and foot traffic could put OR personnel and their

                                             xvii
patients at greater risk of infection. Study researchers found that OR doors were open during
nearly one-third of knee and hip arthroplasty surgeries.
These open doors commonly defeated the purpose of many safety tactics that medical personnel
used to keep ORs germ- and contamination-free, according to study researchers. “Our findings
add to a growing body of evidence of a relatively common practice that could be a potential
safety concern and raises questions about why doors get opened and how we can prevent or
minimize the frequency and duration of behaviours that could compromise OR sterility,” study
senior author Stephen Belkoff, Ph.D., said in a prepared statement.
 “We know for sure is that there was a whole lot more traffic in and out of the OR than seems
necessary or easily explained.” Sterilization and cleaning equipment, on the other hand, enables
OR personnel to devote the necessary time and resources to maintain pristine work
environments. This equipment allows medical professionals to protect themselves and their
patients against a wide range of potential hazards, such as hospital acquired infections.

7. Disposables and Consumables
Facemasks and other disposables and consumables help safeguard an OR surgeon as well as
team members and patients consistently. Many top-of-the-line disposables and consumables
such as biohazard bags, patient care gloves, and waterproofing pads are available and designed
for single use. That way, after you are finished using a single disposable or consumable item,
you’ll be able to replace it for the next patient to improve your chances of maintaining a safe
work environment.
8. Gel Pads and Positioners
Imagine what it would be like to provide patients with unparalleled support to help them combat
general pain and soreness. Thanks to gel pads and positioners, you’ll be able to do just that, as
these items enable a patient to sit or rest comfortably and avoid skin or tissue damage. Gel pads
and positioners typically offer a number of benefits for patients, including:
   Can be heated or cooled instantly.
   Repairable and reusable for long-lasting value.
   Can’t be affected by body fluids, and are easy to clean.
   Serve as cost-effective options, making them great choices for hospitals of all sizes.
   Leakproof, guaranteeing you won’t have to worry about each product’s interior spilling
      out.
9. Surgical Tables and Surgical Table Accessories
A high-quality surgical table and surgical table accessories are at the core of ensuring your OR
team can perform the surgery at hand with confidence.
OR surgical tables high quality image
Surgical tables are valuable for surgeons during both open and minimally invasive procedures.
The tables are manufactured for general surgery, neurology procedures, and other OR
applications. Whether performing general or specialized surgeries, surgical table accessories
will make either more efficient and comfortable for the patient.
A list of general and specific use accessories:
Anaesthesia Screens
                                             xviii
Arm & Hand Surgery Tables
Arm Supports
Clamps
Drain Pans, Hoops & Screens
Head Supports
Leg Supports
Positioners
Restraint Straps
Side Extensions
Transfer Boards




Types of surgeries




                              xix
There are various types of surgery and they can be classified based on different parameters
Based on Timing Surgery can be classified based on the urgency and need to perform the
surgery.
Elective Surgery
The name “elective” might imply that this type of surgery is optional, but that’s not always the
case. An elective procedure is simply one that is planned in advance, rather than one that’s done
in an emergency situation. A wide range of surgical procedures can be considered elective
surgery. Cosmetic surgeries fall into this category, but so can things like ear tubes,
tonsillectomies, and scoliosis surgery. Although these procedures may be done “electively,”
they can be significant and potentially life-changing operations.
Semi-elective Surgery
Semi-elective surgery is a surgery that must be done to preserve the patient’s life, but does not
need to be performed immediately.
Urgent Surgery
An urgent surgery is one that can wait until the patient is medically stable, but should generally
be done today or tomorrow
Emergency Surgery
An emergency surgery is one that must be performed without delay; the patient has no choice
other than immediate surgery, if they do not want to risk permanent disability or death.
Based on Body Part
Surgery can also be classified based on the body part that is being operated on. When surgery is
performed on one organ system or structure, it may be classed by the tissue, organ or organ
system involved. Examples include:
Gastrointestinal surgery
This type of surgery is performed within the digestive tract and its accessory organs.
Gastrointestinal surgery involves the treatment for diseases of the parts of the body involved in
digestion. This includes the oesophagus, stomach, small intestine, large intestine, and rectum. It
also includes the liver, gallbladder, and pancreas
Orthopaedic surgery
                                              xx
This is performed on bones or muscles. The medical specialty dedicated to the diagnosis,
treatment, rehabilitation, and prevention of injuries of the musculoskeletal system including the
muscles, bones, spine, joints, ligaments, tendons, and nerves.
Cardiovascular Surgery
Cardiovascular surgery is the surgical treatment of diseases and disorders of the heart and blood
vessels. Examples of cardiovascular surgery include open heart surgery such as coronary artery
bypass grafting, heart valve replacements, heart transplant and vascular surgery such as
abdominal aortic aneurysm repairs and femoral-tibial bypass grafting.
Gynaecology
Gynaecology refers to the surgical specialty dealing with the health of the female reproductive
system (uterus, vagina and ovaries).
Neurosurgery
The surgical specialty involved in the treatment of disorders of the brain, spinal cord, and
peripheral nerves.
Ophthalmology (Eyes)
A medical specialty focusing on the diagnosis and treatment of disorders of the eye. Conditions
include cataracts, glaucoma, and conjunctivitis, among others.
Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery
A dental specialty focusing on the diagnosis and surgical treatment of diseases, injuries and
defects of the mouth, teeth and gums. Examples of oral surgery include removal of wisdom
teeth, facial injury repair, cleft lip and palate repair, and repair of uneven jaws.
Otolaryngology – Ears, Nose and Throat (ENT)
Otolaryngology is the medical and surgical treatment of the head and neck, including ears, nose
and throat.
Thoracic
This is also known as Cardiothoracic surgery. This is the field of medicine involved in surgical
treatment of organs inside the thorax (the chest)—generally treatment of conditions of the heart
(heart disease) and lungs (lung disease).
Urology
This is a type of surgery that is performed on the urinary tract. It is a surgical specialty that deals
with problems affecting the urinary tract including kidneys, bladder, and prostate.
Based on Equipment Used
Surgery can also be classified based on the type of surgical equipment’s used for the procedure.
Robotic Surgery
Robotic surgery makes use of a surgical robot, such as the Da Vinci or the Zeus surgical systems,
to control the instrumentation under the direction of the surgeon. Da Vinci’s advanced level of
technology takes surgery beyond the limits of the human hand. This da Vinci Surgical System
compliments our goal of extending minimally invasive surgery to the broadest base of patients
including but not limited to: cholecystectomy (gallbladder removal), hysterectomies,
myomectomies, hiatal and hernia repairs, removal of one or both adrenal glands, GERD related
diagnoses (Reflux), and oesophageal stricture.
The da Vinci Surgical System offers
                                                xxi
Enhanced 3D, high-definition vision of operative field, with up to 10x magnification
New optimal dual console, which allows a second surgeon to provide assistance
Ability to mimic the surgeon’s hand movements with enhanced dexterity
Microsurgery
Microsurgery involves the use of an operating microscope for the surgeon to see small
structures.
The most obvious developments have been procedures developed to allow anastomosis of
successively smaller blood vessels and nerves (typically 1 mm in diameter) which have allowed
transfer of tissue from one part of the body to another and re-attachment of severed parts.
Microsurgical techniques are utilized by several specialties today, such as Replantation,
Transplantation, treatment of infertility, etc
Laser Surgery
Laser surgery involves use of a laser for cutting tissue instead of a scalpel or similar surgical
instruments.
Laser surgery is commonly used on the eye. Techniques used include LASIK, which is used to
correct near and far-sightedness in vision, and photorefractive keratectomy, a procedure which
permanently reshapes the cornea using an excimer laser to remove a small amount of the human
tissue.
Based on degree of invasiveness
Surgery can also be classified based on the degree of invasiness of the surgical procedure. By
invasion, this refers to the medical procedure in which the part of the body is entered by incision.
Minimally Invasive Surgery
Minimally invasive surgery is any technique involved in surgery that does not require a large
incision. This relatively new approach allows the patient to recuperate faster with less pain. Not
all conditions are suitable for minimally invasive surgery. Many surgery techniques now fall
under minimally invasive surgery: Laparoscopy, Endoscopy, Arthroscopy and many others.
Open Surgery
An “open” surgery means the cutting of skin and tissues so that the surgeon has a full view of
the structures or organs involved. Examples of open surgery are the removal of the organs, such
as the gallbladder or kidneys.
Based on purpose
Surgery can also be classified based on the purpose for which the surgery is being performed.
Surgeries are performed for various purposes and such can be classified based on the purpose
for the surgery.

Exploratory surgery
Exploratory surgery is a diagnostic method used by doctors when trying to find a diagnosis for
an ailment. It is used most commonly to diagnose or locate cancer in humans.
Therapeutic surgery
Therapeutic surgery treats a previously diagnosed condition
Cosmetic surgery

                                               xxii
Cosmetic surgery is where a person chooses to have an operation, or invasive medical procedure,
to change their physical appearance for cosmetic rather than medical reasons.
In conclusion, there are different types of surgery and they are classified based on a number
parameters ranging from timing, body parts, equipment and purpose of the surgery.

Decontamination
Decontamination
Decontamination is the process of removing or neutralizing chemical or biological agents so that
they no longer pose a hazard. For military purposes, decontamination is undertaken to restore
the combat effectiveness of equipment and personnel as rapidly as possible. Most current
decontamination systems are labour and resource intensive, require excessive amounts of water,
are corrosive and/or toxic, and are not considered environmentally safe. Current R&D is focused
on developing decontamination systems that would overcome these limitations and effectively
decontaminate a broad spectrum of CB agents from all surfaces and materials.

R&D on decontamination has evolved over the years. Ideally, these efforts would result in the
identification and deployment of a "universal" decontaminating system. However, this has not
happened. During and after the 1950s, most decontamination involved aqueous-based systems
or the nonaqueous Decontamination Solution Number 2 (DS2), both of which have weaknesses.
Aqueous-based systems require large amounts of water (often not available on a battlefield) and
are very inefficient at removing agent that has been adsorbed onto or absorbed into a painted
surface. In addition, the contaminated water must be gotten rid of. DS2 is too corrosive for many
applications. Ongoing attempts to develop dry systems (referred to euphemistically as "magic
pixie dusts") that would be easy to transport and use, would not require large amounts of fluids,
and could replace DS2 or aqueous systems, have not yet been successful.


Fixed sites that are critical to the deployment of troops have now become attractive and
vulnerable targets for CB attack, increasing the importance of protecting them or, if protection
is impossible, improving our ability to restore contaminated sites and equipment to operational
status. The focus of R&D has, therefore, been shifted from the decontamination of mobile forces
to the decontamination of fixed sites. The key differences between decontamination of fixed
sites and mobile forces are summarized
Basic anaesthesia
Basic anaesthetic techniques
General anaesthesia (GA)
As a novice trainee, general anaesthesia is the most common type of anaesthetic that you will
be required to provide and become competent with as part of the IAC.
General anaesthesia consists of a triad of:
unconsciousness
analgesia
+/- muscle relaxation.
                                             xxiii
A general anaesthetic (GA) can be subdivided into 3 key stages:
induction - getting the patient to sleep
maintenance - keeping the patient asleep during the operation
emergence - waking the patient up at the end of the procedure.
The most common techniques you will be exposed to are:
spontaneous ventilation with a laryngeal mask airway (GA LMA SV)
intermittent positive pressure ventilation with an endotracheal tube (GA ETT IPPV)
Rapid Sequence Induction to protect the airway if there is a risk of soiling from gastric contents
(RSI GA ETT IPPV).
Your choice of technique will be influenced by specific patient, surgical and anaesthetic factors,
as well as the level of your experience in the specialty and its related subspecialties.
The sections that follow will give you a broad overview and the basic principles underpinning
these three techniques.
General anaesthesia: spontaneous ventilation with an LMA
Generally used for elective or emergency surgery in patients who have been fasted and where
there is no risk of aspiration of gastric contents. Common risk factors for aspiration include:
history or reflux or hiatus hernia intra-abdominal pathology pregnancy recent major trauma or
administration of opiates morbid obesity autonomic dysfunction associated with diabetes.
Suitable for most peripheral surgery in patients who are not obese and for some minor abdominal
surgery where muscle relaxation is not needed (i.e. elective inguinal hernia repair).
Can be used for patients in the supine or lateral position. Not recommended for use in very long
cases. Experienced anaesthetists may use this technique in ENT and Maxillofacial surgery for
short procedures. Basic principles in ASA 1/2 patient: attach basic monitoring (SpO2, ECG and
NIBP) pre-oxygenate the patient
induction - intravenous (propofol) or inhalational induction (sevoflurane) + small dose of
fentanyl followed by insertion of LMA
maintenance - oxygen/air or oxygen/nitrous oxide plus volatile or intravenous agent
emergence – 100% Oxygen and turn off volatile or intravenous agent. Remove LMA when
patient wakes up.
General anaesthesia: endotracheal intubation and positive pressure ventilation
Generally used for elective or emergency surgery in patients who have been fasted and where
there is no risk of aspiration of gastric contents but where:
muscle relaxation is required to facilitate surgery
surgery will increase intra-abdominal pressure or the bowel will be manipulated

Used for elective or emergency surgery in patients who are either not fasted or where there is a
risk of aspiration of gastric contents. The airway is protected from aspiration by the application
of cricoid pressure prior to rapid intubation using a depolarizing muscle relaxant. Thereafter,
the anaesthetic technique is the same as an ETT with IPPV in the previous section.




                                              xxiv
Basic principles in ASA 1/2 patient: attach basic monitoring (SpO2, ECG and NIBP) pre-
oxygenate the patient for 3 minutes proper preparation – tipping trolley, suction available,
equipment checked induction intravenous (thiopental or propofol) suxamethonium to facilitate
intubation with cricoid pressure applied by anaesthetic assistant to prevent aspiration oral
intubation and confirmation of tube placement by visualization, auscultation and capnography
release of cricoid pressure non-depolarizing muscle relaxant to maintain muscle relaxation
maintenance oxygen/air or oxygen/nitrous oxide plus volatile agent top up doses of muscle
relaxant guided by neuromuscular monitoring additional analgesia as required emergence 100%
oxygen turn off volatile or intravenous agent reverse neuromuscular block remove ETT when
patient spontaneously breathing, regains airway reflexes and wakes up it is recommended that
this is performed with the patient in the left lateral position. Other types of anaesthesia Local
infiltration Good choice for skin and soft-tissue surgery of limited size, depth and duration, e.g.
ring block for a distal finger operation.

Regional anaesthesia Achieved by introducing a local anaesthetic agent near the nerves
supplying that region. May be used as the sole mode of anaesthesia or combined with general
anaesthesia or sedation.



Basic pharmacology in theatre
DRUGS ACTING ON THE CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
To facilitate the understanding of the pharmacological and unwanted effects of CNS drugs, the
physiological functions of the main CNS neurotransmitters are discussed briefly. Noradrenaline.
Noradrenergic transmission is important in control of mood (functional deficiency resulting
depression) controlling wakefulness, and alertness. Dopamine. Dopamine is important in motor
control (Parkinsonism is due to dopamine deficiency), has behavioural effects (excessive
dopamine activity is implicated in schizophrenia), important in hormone release (prolactin, GH)
and dopamine in chemoreceptor trigor zone causes nausea and vomiting.5-HT.
Physiological functions associated with 5-HT pathways include; feeding behaviour, behavioural
response (hallucinatory behaviour), control of mood and emotion, control of body temperature
and vomiting. Acetylcholine (Ach).
 Ach has effects on arousal, on learning, and on short-term memory. Dementia and parkinsonism
are associated with abnormalities in cholinergic pathways. GABA. GABA is an inhibitory
neurotransmitter in CNS.Glycine. is an inhibitory neurotransmitter, acts on GABA like receptor
in the spinal cord?
GENERAL ANESTHETICS
General anesthesia involves the physiological changes: Reversible loss of response to painful
stimuli, loss of consciousness and loss of motor and autonomic reflexes. Loss of consciousness
is associated with inhibition of the activity of reticular formation. General anesthetics are
administered by inhalation or by intravenous routes. They are classified into two on the basis of
their route of administration as inhalation and intravenous anesthetics.
Inhalation anesthetics.
                                              xxv
The main agents are: Halothane, nitrous oxide, enflurane and ether.
1. Halothane: Is the most widely used agent, highly lipid soluble, potent. It causes arrhythmia,
hangover and the risk of liver damage is high if used repeatedly.
2. Nitrous oxide: Oderless and colourless gas. It is rapid in action and also an effective
analgesic agent. Its potency is low, hence must be combined with other agents. It is a relatively
free of serious unwanted effects.
3. Enflurane: Halogenated ether (similar to halothane). Poorly metabolized in the liver, thus
less toxic than halothane. It is faster in its action, less liable to accumulate in the body fat
compared to halothane. It causes seizure during induction and following recovery from
anaesthesia.
4. Ether: Has analgesic and muscle relaxant properties. It is highly explosive, causes
respiratory tract irritation, postoperative nausea and vomiting. It is not widely used currently.
INTRAVENOUS ANESTHETICS
Intravenous anesthetics act much more rapidly, producing unconsciousness in about 20
seconds, as soon as the drug reaches the brain from the site of its injection. These agents used
for induction of anaesthesia followed by inhalation agent. The main induction agent in current
use is: thiopentone, etomidate, propofol, ketamine and short acting benzodiazepine
(midazolam).
Thiopentone: Thiopentone is a barbiturate with very high lipid solubility. After intravenous
administration the drug enters to tissues with a large blood flow (liver, kidneys, brain, etc) and
more slowly to muscle. Uptake into body fat occurs slowly because of the low blood flow to this
tissue, which may cause prolonged effect if given repeatedly. It causes cardiovascular
depression. Etomidate: It is more quickly metabolized and the risk of cardiovascular depression
is less compared to thiopentone. Etomidate suppresses the adrenal cortex, which has been
associated.with an increase in mortality in severely ill patients.
Ketamine: acts more slowly than thiopentone and produces a different effect, known as
dissociative anaesthesia in which there is a marked sensory loss and analgesia, as well as
amnesia and paralysis of movement, without actual loss of consciousness. Ketamine causes
dysphoria, hallucinations during recovery.Benzodiazepines including diazepam, lorazepam, and
midazolam are used in general anesthetic procedures. Compared with intravenous barbiturates,
benzodiazepines produce a slower onset of central nervous system effects. Benzodiazepines
prolong the postanesthetic recovery period but also cause a high incidence of amnesia for events
occurring after the drug is administered.The benzodiazepines are useful in anesthesia as
premedication and intraoperative sedation.
Opioid analgesic anesthesia: Opioid analgesics can be used for general anesthesia, in patients
undergoing cardiac surgery and fentanyl and its derivates are commonly used for these purposes.
Preanesthetic medication: It is the use of drugs prior to the administration of anaesthetic agent
with the important objective of making anaesthesia safer and more agreable to the patient. The
drugs commonly used are, opioid analgesics, barbiturates, anticholinergics, anti emetics and
glucocorticoids.
SEDATIVE AND HYPNOTIC DRUGS

                                             xxvi
Anxiolytic drugs are used to treat the symptoms of anxiety, where as hypnotic drugs used to
treat insomnia. The same drugs are used for both purposes.Classes of anxiolytic and hypnotic
drugs: The main groups of the drugs are:1. Benzodiazepines. Benzodiazepines are the most
important group, used as sedative and hypnotic agents.2. 5- HT1A receptor agonist (e.g.
buspirone). It is recently introduced anxiolytic.3. Barbiturates (phenobarbitone).
They are nowadays less commonly used as sedativehypnotics.4. β -adrenoceptor antagonists
(e.g. propranolol). They are used to treat some forms of anxiety,where physical symptoms
(sweating, tremor, and tachycardia), are troublesome. They are not used as hypnotics. 5.
Miscellaneous drugs (chloral hydrate, paraldehyde, and diphenhydramine). These drugs are not
commonly recommended for axiety or insomia.Benzodiazepines Benzodiazepines are well
absorbed when given orally. They bind strongly to plasma proteins,however, many of them
accumulate gradually in the body fat (i.e. they are highly lipid soluble).Benzodiazepines are
inactivated by the liver and excreted in the urine.Based on their duration of action roughly
divided into short acting (flurazepam, triazolam),medium acting (alprazepam, lorazepam) and
long acting compounds (diazepam,chlordiazepoxide, clonazepam).Pharmacodynamics Act by
binding to a specific regulatory site on the GABAA receptor, thus enhancing the inhibitory
effects of GABA. Central nervous system effects of benzodiazepines include:
1. Reduction of anxiety and aggression.
2. Sedation and induction of sleep.
3. Reduction of muscle tone and coordination.
4. Anticonvulsant effects.
Clinical Uses
• Treatment insomnia
• Anxiety
• Preoperative mediations
• Acute alcohol withdrawal
• As anticonvulsants
• Chronic muscle spasm and spasticity
Unwanted effects
• Toxic effects due to acute overdosage causes prolonged sleep.
• Unwanted effects occurring during normal therapeutic use includes: drowsiness,
confusion, amnesia, and impaired motor coordination. Tolerance and dependence:
Pharmacokinetic and tissue tolerance and also cause physical dependence. i.e. stopping
benzodiazepines treatment after weeks or months causes an increase in symptoms of anxiety.
5 - HT1A receptor agonist Buspirone is a potent agonist of. 5 - HT1A receptors. Anxiolytic
effects take days to weeks to develop. Buspirone does not cause sedation, motor incoordination
and withdrawal effects. The main side effects are nausea, dizziness, headache, and restlessness.
Barbiturates
They are non-selective CNS depressants, which produce effects ranging from sedation and
reduction of anxiety, to unconsciousness and death from respiratory and cardiovascular failure.
Barbiturates act by enhancing action of GABA, but less specific than benzodiazepines. They are
potent inducers of hepatic drug metabolizing enzymes, hence likely to cause drug interaction.
                                            xxvii
Tolerance and dependence occur, more than benzodiazepines.
ANTIEPILEPTIC DRUGS
Seizure is associated with the episodic high frequency discharge of impulses by a group of
neurons in the brain.
Seizure may be partial or generalized depending on the location and the spread of the
abnormal neuronal discharge. The attack mainly involves motor, sensory or behavioural
phenomena.
Partial seizures are often associated with damage to the brain, whereas generalized seizure
occurs without obvious cause. Two common forms of generalized seizures are grand mal and
petit mal.
Mechanism of action
Anticonvulsant drugs act by two mechanisms: by reducing electrical excitability of cell
membrane and by enhancing GABA mediated synaptic transmission.
The main drugs used in the treatment of epilepsy are phenytoin, carbamazepine, valproate,
ethosuximide and phenobarbitone.
Phenytoin
It is commonly used antiepileptic drug. It is effective against different forms of partial and
generalized seizures; however it is not effective in absence seizures.
Well absorbed when given orally. It is metabolised by the liver. It is liver enzyme inducer and
therefore, increases the rate of metabolism of other drugs. Main side effects are sedation,
confusion, gum hyperplasia, skin rash, anaemia, nystagmus,and diplopia.
Carbamazepine
It is derived from tricyclic antidepressant. Its pharmacological action resembles those of
phenytoin, however, it is chiefly effective in the treatment of partial seizure. It is also used in
the
treatment of trigeminal neuralgia and manic-depressive illness.
It is powerful inducer of liver microsomal enzymes, thus accelerates the metabolism of
phenytoin, warfarin, oral contraceptives and corticosteroids.
Carbamazepine causes sedation, mental disturbances and water retention.Valproate
Valproate is chemically unrelated to the other antiepileptic drugs. The mechanism of action is
unknown. It is used in grand mal, partial, petit mal and myoclonic seizure.Relatively has few
side effects, however, it is potentially hepatotoxic. It is non sedating.
Ethosuximide
Has fewer side effects and used in the treatment of absence seizures.
Phenobarbitone
It is well absorbed after oral administration and widely distributed. Renal excretion is enhanced
by acidification of the urine. Phenobarbitone is liver enzyme inducer and hence accelerates the
metabolism of many drugs like oral contraceptives and warfarin.
The clinical use of phenobarbitone is nearly the same as that of phenytoin. The most important
unwanted effect is sedation.
Benzodiazepines: Clonazepam and related compounds, clobazam are claimed to be relatively

                                             xxviii
selective as antiepileptic drugs. Sedation is the main side effect of these compounds, and an
added problem may be the withdrawal syndrome, which results in an exacerbation of seizures if
the drug is stopped.
Perioperative Theatre ethics
Medico–legal aspect of perioperative theatre care
 Introduction
A basic principle of patient care is to do no further harm. A health care provider usually avoids
legal exposure if he or she acts:
According to an appropriate standard of care
Ethics and law
Law - a body of principles recognized and applied by the state in the administration
Ethics - Ethics are quite distinct from legal law, although these do overlap in important ways
Laws applicable to nursing
Public Health Act cap 242 implies that the people of Kenya are entitled to properly secured and
maintained health care services which are available resources of the state
Right to considerate and respectful care from all members of the health care system at all times
and under all circumstances Laws applicable to patient care
Patients of bills of right to information (disclosure): preventive health care including health
education, Individual own diagnosis and specific treatment program
Right to informed choices, participation in treatment opinion and decisions Right to access
emergency services when and where the need arises. Patients of bill of rights Right to privacy,
dignity and comfort Right to
Right to
Confidentiality safety
 Right to expect reasonable coordination and continuity of care i.e. appointment dates, and Drs.
who will be continuing with care after is discharge Medical negligence and malpractice
Negligence Unintentional breach of duty or failure Malpractice Held liable for negligence
Essential elements
Duty and standard of duty, causation injury care, breach of & damage
Negligence
Deviation from accepted or expected standards of care expected to protect from unreasonable
risk of harm or the failure to use the care/skills that any care giver in the same/similar situation
would be expected to do
Occurs when there is duty care
Carelessness assumes the legal quality of negligence
Malpractice
Professional negligence when the conduct fails to meet the legal standard of care and someone
is damaged as a result Law has developed a measuring scale called standard of care
Malpractice



                                              xxix
Standard of care – the expected care, skill, & judgment under similar circumstances by a
similarly trained, reasonable nurse or what a reasonably prudent person acting under similar
would do
Elements of negligence
Failure to meet the standards of due care Any harm resulting from failure to meet the standard
Breach of this standard causes an injury to the patient Abandonment of patients under your care
•Failure to observe & take appropriate action Leaving patients unattended /refusing to attend to
a patient Elements of negligence
Injury sustained to a patient under your care Damage -Derived from harm or injury Nosocomial
infection- meaning that there is no proper measure of infection control
Loss of patients property/documents •Documentation: Omission & Commission
Wrongful death - patient dies because of negligence of health care organization or health care
professionals mistakes
Elements required to prove negligence Duty of Care (Duty to Act)
Duty of care to the patient (Nurses assume a duty to provide care for the patient which is
consistent with the standard of Care)
Knowledge of the case & management so as to provide reasonable care - need to collaborate
with other professionals
Consideration of professional ethics Elements required to prove negligence Breach of Duty
Failure to perform to the standard or failure to act consistently with applicable standard of care
leading to injury and damages Damages
Actual loss which occurred or harm Medical-legal cases
Is any case where the discipline of medicine comes to help the legal fraternity in its discharge
of duties
Interface of dimensional perplexing medicine & can be & law is multi- quite complex &
 H/Care professionals need to be very cautious in dealing with the medico- legal cases
Medical-legal cases
Request of the patient, relatives or friend for not registering the case as medico-legal should not
be accepted
Medico-legal case should be registered as soon as the Dr. suspects foul play or case brought
several days after the incident
Example of medical legal cases

All cases of injuries
All cases of burns
Alleged cases of assault
All cases of suspected or evident of poisoning or intoxication
Cases of unconscious/comatose where its cause is not natural or not clear
Cases of suspected self-inflicted injuries or attempted suicide
End of life issues
Life sustaining measures

                                              xxx
Cardio-pulmonary resuscitation (CPR) - When to stop mechani                             -of-life
decisions
With-holding or Withdrawing Treatment
Do not resuscitate (DNR) – Euthanasia
End of life issues

Consent or refuse Rx
Discussions regarding advance directives/end - of-life issues should be:-
made as early as possible before death is imminent
Not be made in hospital setting to allow more time for discussion, processing & decision making
Advance directives
Communication that specifies a person’s preference about medical care in the event that person
becomes incapacitated
Includes
Do not resuscitate(DNR)order
The pt. or surrogate has given clear directives not to resuscitate the pt. in event of
cardiopulmonary arrest
Advance directives
There should be discussions, broad consultation and accurate documentation that reflect
discussions between family and members of the critical care team and any subsequent decisions.
Any directives those involved
should be clear to all in patients care
Advance directives
Do not resuscitate(DNR)order cont´d
The order is clearly written in the pt.’s records by physicians so that misunderstanding do not
occur It must meet the facility’s policy Allow-a-natural deathIn what situations should CPR be
used?Done to patients with irreversible or terminal illness
Advance directives

A generally accepted Position is that resuscitation should cease if the physician determines the
efforts to be futile or hopeless
Advance directives
Living will
Provide mechanisms in which an individual can allow which specific Rx to be withheld in an
event they become incapacitated

Advance directives
Health care proxy or surrogate/durable power of attorney for health care
Pt legally designate a person whom they trust to make decisions on their behave should they
become incapacitated
Protects pt.’s interest medically than a living will

                                             xxxi
End of life decisions
End-of-life decisions are often difficult & are best made after careful discussions between the
H/Care professional & the patient (or the legal next of kin)
End of life decisions
Withholding or withdrawal of treatment
This involves the withholding or withdrawal of multiple life sustaining therapies
Withholding" refers to not initiating treatment, whereas “withdrawing "refers to stopping
treatment once started
End of life decisions
Effective Management of Surgical Instruments Withdrawing of life support is ethically
acceptable and clinically desirable if it reduces the unnecessary suffering in patients whose life
is considered hopeless and any treatment given is futile e.g. withdrawing of ventilation support,
ionotropic drugs etc.
Withdrawing Tx for sound moral reasons does not violate professional obligations; however
H/Care professionals may find it emotionally difficult to withdraw Tx
End of life decisions
The nurse ensures that the patient/legal next of kin understands the information by clarifying
technical terms & helping the patient/next of kin weigh treatment options
End of life decisions
Euthanasia t's illegal Has primary intention of intervention e.g. giving a lethal injection to cause
death,Can be tested in court

Assignment 2
Discuss the differences between the following terms
1. Tort
2. Libel vs Assault vs slender
3. Breach of contract vs absconding duty 4. Negligence vs malpractice
EMPLOYMENT ACT CHAPTER 226

EMPLOYMENT RELATIONSHIP

Contracts Contract of service
No person shall be employed under a contract of service except in accordance with the
provisions of this Act. Oral and written contracts
The provisions of this Act shall apply to oral and written contracts.
General provision of contract of service A contract of service—
(a) for a period or a number of working days which amount in the
aggregate to the equivalent, of three months or more; or
(b) which provides for the performance of any specified work which could not reasonably be
expected to be completed within a period or a number of working days amounting in the
aggregate to the equivalent of three months,shall be in writing.

                                              xxxii
Employment particulars
(1) A written contract of service specified in section 9 shall state particulars
of employment which may, subject to subsection (3), be given in instalments and
shall be given not later than two months after the beginning of the employment.
(2) A written contract of service shall state—
(a) the name, age, permanent address and sex of the employee; (b) the name of the employer;
(c) the job description of the employment;
(d) the date of commencement of the employment; (e) the form and duration of the contract;
(f) the place of work; (g) the hours of work;
(h) the remuneration, scale or rate of remuneration, the method of calculating that remuneration
and details of any other benefits;
(i) the intervals at which remuneration is paid; and
(j) the date on which the employee’s period of continuous employment began, taking into
account any employment with a previous employer which counts towards that period; and
(k) any other prescribed matter.
Payment, disposal and recovery of wages, allowances,
(1) Subject to this Act, an employer shall pay the entire amount of the wages
earned by or payable to an employee in respect of work done by the employee in
pursuance of a contract of service directly, in the currency of Kenya— (a) in cash(b) into an
account at a bank, or building society, designated by the employee;
(c) by cheque, postal order or money order in favor of the employee; or
Payment ctt..
(1) In the absence of an employee, to a person other than the employee,
if the person is duly authorized by the employee in writing to receive the wages on the
employee’s behalf.(2) An employer shall pay wages to an employee on a working day, and
during
working hours, at or near to the place of employment or at such other place as may
be agreed between the employer and the employee.
(3) An employer shall not pay wages to an employee in any place where intoxicating liquor is
sold or readily available for supply, except in the case of employees employed to work in that
place.
(4) No person shall give or promise to any person any advance of money or any valuable
consideration upon a condition expressed or implied that the personor any dependent of that
person shall enter upon any employment.
Sexual harassment
An employee is sexually harassed if the employer of that employee or a representative of that
employer or a co-worker—
(a) directly or indirectly requests that employee for sexual intercourse, sexual contact or any
other form of sexual activity that contains an implied or express—
promise of preferential treatment in employment; threat of detrimental treatment in employment;
or threat about the present or future employment status of the employee;

                                            xxxiii
(b) uses language whether written or spoken of a sexual nature; (c) uses visual material of a
sexual nature; or
(d) shows physical behavior of a sexual nature which directly or indirectly subjects the employee
to behavior that is unwelcome or offensive to that employee and that by its nature has a
detrimental effect on that employee’s employment, job performance, or job satisfaction.
Sexual harassment policy i. that every employee is entitled to employment that is free of
ii. sexual harassment;
iii. that the employer shall take steps to ensure that no employee is subjected to sexual
harassment;
iv. that the employer shall take such disciplinary measures as the employer deems appropriate
against any person under the employer’s direction, who subjects any employee to sexual
harassment;
v. explaining how complaints of sexual harassment may be brought to the attention of the
employer; and that the employer will not disclose the name of a complainant or the
circumstances related to the complaint to any person except where disclosure is necessary for
the purpose of
vi. investigating the complaint or taking disciplinary measures in relation thereto.
Leave 1. Annual Leave
According to section 28 of the Kenyan Employment Act, every employee is entitled to Annual
leave days after every 12 consecutive months of service with full pay. As an employer, you can
divide these 21 leave days in intervals with the consent of your employee.
2. Sick Leave
Section 30 of the employment ACT highlights that an employee who has worked for you for 2
consecutive months is entitled to sick leave of not less than seven days with full pay.
3. The maternity /Paternity leave

Further Section 29 of the ACT says that a female employee is entitled to 3 months maternity
leave with full pay after which she also has a right to return to her job or with better terms than
what she had before she left for the maternity leave. Clause 8 of section 29 provides that male
employees are as well entitled to two weeks paternity leave with full pay.
4. Compassionate leave
Compassionate leave in Kenya allows an employee to attend to his/her misfortunes which are
usually not planned for and may occur at any point in time including death, sickness or accidents
of relatives and friends.
5. Compulsory Leave
Compulsory leave is an administrative leave imposed on an employee by the employer normally
to pave way for investigations into possible employment offences which may ultimately lead to
commencement of disciplinary proceedings.
6. Leave of absence
Upon request, other employers in Kenya allow their employees to unpaid leave of absence from
work for a period of time depending on the organization.
Identification and reporting of faulty Operation Theatre apparatus
                                             xxxiv
MANAGING SURGICAL INSTRUMENTS IS A TEAM EFFORT
Effective Management of Surgical Instruments
Perioperative personnel and processing personnel must WORK TOgETHER
to ensure the effective management of surgical instruments.Effective Management of Surgical
Instruments
PURPOSE STATEMENT
The purpose of this educational activity is to demonstrate proper management of surgical
instruments and to emphasize that effective communication between perioperative and
instrument processing personnel is essential to ensure that instruments used in surgical and other
invasive procedures facilitate safe and effective patient outcomes.
Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

PATIENT SAFETY
•     Optimal surgical outcome.
•     Reduced complications related to tissue damage.
•     Reduced incidence of infection.
•     Reduced recuperation time
Effective Management of Surgical Instruments
REDUCED EXPENSES
•     Reduce patient length of stay.
•     Reduce expenses related to hospital-associated infection.
•     Reduce expenses related to complications.
•     Extend instrument life.
•     Reduce replacement costs.
–     A major cause of instrument damage is mishandling and abuse.
Effective Management of Surgical Instruments
Instrument management
Begins in the Operating ROOM at the point of instruments
DURING THE PROCEDURE
Instruments must be
INSPECTED BEFORE use on the field.
Effective Management of Surgical Instruments
Any DEFECTIVE OR MISSINg INSTRUMENTS must be CLEARLY IDENTIFIED for SPD
or the instrument technician in ambulatory surgery.Effective Management of Surgical
Instruments
HANDLING
•       Handle instruments carefully and ONE AT A TIME or in SMALL NUMBERS.
•       Use instruments ONLY for the purpose for which they were intended
Effective Management of Surgical Instruments
•      Use scissors only for the MATERIAL FOR WHICH THEY WERE DESIgNED.


                                             xxxv
 –   Cutting other materials can cause misalignment, loss of sharpness, damage (e.g. Use
     Mayo scissors, not Metzenbaums or more delicate scissors to cut drapes and material
     other than tissue).
•Use sharp instruments (diamond knives, cystotomes, dissectors, knives) ONLY FOR THEIR
INTENDED USE.
  – Misuse can cause blades and edges to dull and impair surgical performance.
Effective Management of Surgical Instruments
 ~      Use forceps APPROPRIATE TO THE TASK at hand
  – Improper alignment can create serious problems with function and harm to the patient
•       MATCH NEEDLE HOLDERS TO THE SIZE OF NEEDLE for which it is intended
–Large needles will spring the jaws of delicate needle holders and reduce holding power
Effective Management of Surgical Instruments
•      During the procedure, wipe blood and tissue from instruments
IMMEDIATELY AFTER USE.
  – Debris that is allowed to dry on instruments causes deterioration, corrosion, and pitting.
  – Saline solution may be be used to wipe instruments that will be used again during the
     procedure.
Effective Management of Surgical Instruments
•       PROTECT TIPS of instruments with tip protectors.
  – Prevent tips of instruments from contacting other instruments and snagging on towels and
     sponges
Effective Management of Surgical Instruments
FOLLOWING THE PROCEDURE
•     Remove disposable sharps; manage sharps appropriately.
Effective Management of Surgical Instrument
PREPARE THE INSTRUMENTS
•      Open box locks.
  • Insure that all multipart instruments are DISASSEMBLED.
  – KEEP PARTS TOgETHER for easy reassembly after processing
  • EXPOSE all surfaces
  – Cleaning, disinfectants, and sterilants must
CONTACT ALL SURFACES of an instrument for the process to be effective

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments
•      All cannulated equipment and handpieces should be FLUSHED
Effective Management of Surgical Instruments
  Organize instruments into sets.
–    All instruments, used and unused, go back into the set.
–    Once opened onto the sterile field, the entire set is considered contaminated.
•    Place HEAVY INSTRUMENTS ON THE BOTTOM; lighter instruments on top.
Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

                                           xxxvi
•    Clearly identify deficient/missing instruments.
Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

•    CONTAIN CONTAMINATED instruments to protect personnel.
•    DO NOT ALLOW BLOOD AND DEBRIS TO DRY on instruments.
–    Soak in demineralized water to prevent drying of bioburden.
–    Saline, disinfectants, and chlorinated solutions can cause pitting and corrosion and should
never be used for soaking instruments.
•    Transport instruments to SPD as quickly as possible.
–    Instruments should not remain in water for lengthy periods of time.
–    Biofilms may form, particularly within lumens.

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

BIOFILM
•     An aggregate of organisms encased within a gelatinous matrix.
–     Biofilm is the SLIMY FEELINg on the inside of a container that has held water for a period
of time.
–     Once formed, a biofilm CANNOT BE RINSED AWAY; it can only be removed by
mechanical means.
•     The presence of a biofilm makes cleaning more difficult.
–     Biofilm can pose a SERIOUS THREAT TO HEALTH.
–     Biofilm CAN COMPROMISE THE DISINFECTION AND STERILIZATION
PROCESSES

A biofilm CAN BREAK FREE from the surface of a device resulting in a MASSIVE
INFUSION OF BACTERIA that can cause an infection that is difficult to treat.Effective
Management of Surgical Instruments
•    Cleaning is the FIRST AND MOST IMPORTANT STEP in instrument processing.
•    An instrument must be clean before it can be sterilized.
–    Debris prevents sterilant from contacting all surfaces of an instrument.
–    Improper cleaning of instruments can cause harm to patients.
AN INSTRUMENT CAN BE CLEAN BUT NOT STERILE; NO INSTRUMENT CAN BE
STERILE BUT NOT CLEAN.
Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

STERILE PROCESSING RESPONSIBILITIES

•    Cleaning/ Decontamination
–    Wash
–    Rinse

                                            xxxvii
•    Lubrication
•    Inspection and Testing
–    Continue Reprocessing
–    Send for Repair/Discard
•    Prepare for sterilization
•    Sterilization
•    Storage
Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

TOXIC ANTERIOR SEGMENT SYNDROME (TASS)
•    An ACUTE INFLAMMATION of the anterior chamber, or segment, of the eye following
cataract surgery.
•    Can be caused by INADEQUATE OR INAPPROPRIATE CLEANINg of instruments
leaving irritants on the surface of intraocular surgical instruments.

Effective Management of Surgical Instrument

TOXIC ANTERIOR SEGMENT SYNDROME (TASS) (CONT.)
•    Risks may be associated with the use of enzymatic cleaners.
–    INCOMPLETE RINSINg, especially of cannulated instruments, has been identified with
TASS.
•    Chemical sterilization methods such as EtO and peracetic acid may leave CHEMICAL
RESIDUES on the instruments that promote TASS
Effective Management of Surgical Instruments
MANUAL CLEANING
•    HAND WASH microsurgical instruments and trays.
•    Remove mats from trays and CLEAN EACH SEPARATELY.
•    Do not put delicate microsurgical instruments in mechanical washer unless it has a
DELICATE CYCLE.
Effective Management of Surgical Instrument
•    OPEN ALL HINgED microsurgical instruments for maximum exposure of hinges.
•    Debris left in box locks or crevices can be baked on in sterilization, causing future
BREAKAgE UNDER STRESS.
•    DISASSEMBLE instruments with removable parts Effective Management of Surgical
Instruments
•    Wash each instrument individually to ensure proper cleaning and to prevent injury.
Effective Management of Surgical Instruments
•    Do not use abrasive cleaners when cleaning microsurgical instruments; they can damage
or scar finishes.
•    Use soft brush and instruments wipes.
–    Brush all serrations, crevices, tips, handles, and hinges.

                                         xxxviii
–    Brushing should be done under the surface of the water to prevent aerosolization of
contaminants.
Effective Management of Surgical Instruments
CANNULATED INSTRUMENTS
•    Cannulas, irrigation cannulas, irrigation/aspiration (I/A) handpieces, suction tips,
cystotomes.
•    Use a brush of the appropriate size to clean the lumen; hold instrument and brush below
the water surface.
–    Clean and sterilize the brush DAILY or according to the manufacturer’s directions.

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments
CANNULATED INSTRUMENTS (CONT.)
•    Flush lumens using a syringe filled with warm distilled or deionized water according to the
manufacturer’s directions.
•    Flush below the surface of the water to avoid aerosolizing contaminant

Effective Management of Surgical Instrument
ANNULATED INSTRUMENTS (CONT.)
•    Follow rinse with air dry.
–    50cc syringe filled with air.
–    Compressed air
Effective Management of Surgical Instruments
AUTOMATED CLEANING / MECHANICAL WASHING
•    A washer-decontaminator can be used to mechanically wash sturdier instruments in an
agitated detergent bath.
•    Use detergent with NEUTRAL PH.
–    Follow the recommendations of both the manufacturer of the detergent and the
manufacturer of the instrument.
Effective Management of Surgical Instrument

AUTOMATED CLEANING / MECHANICAL WASHING (CONT.)
•    Place heavy instruments in the bottom of the tray or basket.
•    Load small or light instruments in separate trays.
Effective Management of Surgical Instruments
AUTOMATED CLEANING / MECHANICAL WASHING (CONT.)
•    Do not put microsurgical instruments into a washer decontaminator unless it has a
DELICATE CYCLE.
•    Do not put powered or lensed instruments into a washer decontaminator unless
recommended by the instrument manufacturer.
•    Do not use a washer decontaminator
for heat, moisture, or pressure-sensitive instruments.

                                            xxxix
Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

MECHANICAL CLEANING WITH HARD WATER
•   Mineral deposits will accumulate on the walls of equipment after repeated use.
•   Clean equipment regularly to remove impurities and scale.
•   Water purifying system or softening agent added before each use minimizes formation of
scum, scale, and discoloration.

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments
PREPARE THE INSTRUMENTS
•    Just as in the OR, SPD personnel must insure that
–    Box locks are open
–    All multipart instruments are disassembled
–    All instruments in a set are together
–    All surfaces are exposed so that disinfectants and sterilants can reach ALL surfaces
Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

PREPARE THE INSTRUMENTS (CONT.)
•    Protect sharp instruments
–    Sharp tips and sharp edges are easily dulled or broken.
•    Protect personnel from injury from sharp instruments.
–    Don’t bury sharp instruments among other instruments.
–    They should be readily visible to avoid injury when handling.
Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

ULTRASONIC CLEANING
•    Ultrasonic cleaners use high frequency sound waves to create mechanical vibration.
•    Cavitation: microscopic bubbles form on every surface, then implode, creating a vacuum
which pulls particles from every crevice of the instrument.
•    Ultrasound penetrates areas that a brush or mechanical washer cannot reach.
Effective Management of Surgical Instruments
•    Use detergent at the proper concentration and temperature, recommended by the
manufacturer.
•    Ultrasound for 5 minutes or according to the manufacturer’s directions.
•    The ultrasound machine should be drained and cleaned/disinfected frequently.
–    Frequency of cleaning is based on the amount of use.
–    Frequency can be as often as every 1-2 hours or after every use.

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments
•    Sort instruments into batches, separated by metal composition.
•    Never place different metals in ultrasonic cleaner at the same time.

                                              xl
•    Stainless steel and titanium instruments must be cleaned separately.
•    Mixing incompatible metals can CAUSE PITTINg, ETCHINg, AND DEgRADATION of
surface treatments.

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

ULTRASONIC CLEANING (CONT.)
•     Powered instruments should be not cleaned in an ultrasonic washer.
•     A NEUTRAL PH ultrasound solution is also vital to protect the passivation layer on
instruments and prevent corrosion.
Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

ULTRASONIC CLEANING (CONT.)
•     PROTECT tips, cutting edges and box lock from other instruments.
–     Ultrasonic vibration can cause premature wear whe instruments contact adjacent
instruments.
•     Rinse instruments thoroughly with DISTILL WATER after the cycle to remove residue
and particles from surfaces and to preve staining

Effective Management of Surgical Instrument

ULTRASONIC CLEANING (CONT.)
•    CHECK SCREWS on instruments, as vibration may loosen screws.
•    Instruments should be AIR DRIED with filtered, compressed air.
•    USE HOT AIR DRYER.
•    Avoid canned, compressed air due to particulates.
–    Protect fine tips and edges which can be damaged when snagged on gauze or towel.
•    If drying with a towel, the towel should be LINT-FREE
Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

•    Lubrication helps prevent staining, rusting and corrosion (if specified by the instrument
manufacturer).
•    Lubrication promotes smooth action of hinged instruments
•    Proper lubrication helps to keep instruments clean by preventing mineral and protein build
up.
Effective Management of Surgical Instruments
•    Lubricate only instruments with mechanical parts.
•    Use a water-soluble, anti-microbial lubricant after each cleaning, or a minimum of once
each day.
•    Water soluble lubricant penetrates the box locks, hinges and crevices, preventing binding
and excessive wear.

                                             xli
•    Do not lubricate cannulated instrument

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments
•     Follow the manufacturer’s instructions for lubrication.
–     Place instruments individually in a perforated tray; do not allow instruments to touch one
another. Immerse the open perforated tray in the lubricant.
–     30-40 seconds is the usual immersion time.
•     Replace the lubricant at least daily to keep it clean.
•     DO NOT USE SILICONE SPRAYS or other oils which can build up in hinges and crevices
and inhibit sterilization.
Effective Management of Surgical Instruments
•     Let the instruments drain.
•     Do not rinse or wipe the instruments.
•     Some lubricant will be removed during ultrasonic cleaning.
Effective Management of Surgical Instruments
•     Lubricant film should remain on instruments through the sterilization process.
–     Though much of the lubricant is removed during preparation and sterilization, the lubricant
that remains provides surface protection
Effective Management of Surgical Instruments
INSPECTING AND TESTING
•     Magnified visual and mechanical inspection is a CRUCIAL STEP in the processing of
instruments.
•     Each instrument is inspected following the lubricant bath.
–     Misalignment, malfunction, dull edges or points on sharp instruments, bent tips, loose
screws, pits, nicks, cracks, corrosion, etc.
Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

INSPECTING AND TESTING (CONT.)
•     Damaged instruments are SET ASIDE for further evaluation, repair, or replacement.
–     Damaged instruments must never be put into sets.
–     A set should not be processed until the damaged instrument has been replaced;
INCOMPLETE
SETS CAN CAUSE DELAYS IN SURGERY
Effective Management of Surgical Instruments
INSPECTING AND TESTING (CONT.)
•     The instrument finish should have no dull spots, dents, nicks, or cracks.
•     Incompletely cleaned instruments must be reprocessed.
 Effective Management of Surgical Instruments
INSPECTING AND TESTING (CONT.)
•     Sharp instruments (scissors, rongeurs, osteotomes, curettes, knives, etc.) should be tested
for sharpness and smooth cutting under magnification.

                                              xlii
•    Hinged instruments should work smoothly without stiffness.
Effective Management of Surgical Instruments
FORCEPS
•    Jaws that overlap when tightly closed are out of alignment.
•    Teeth of forceps must mesh properly.
•    Tying platforms must meet evenly over the full length to eliminate damage to fine sutures.

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments
•    Hold the ring handles in both hands, open the instrument, wiggle the instrument to identify
excessive play in the box lock.
–    Excessive play indicates alignment problems or wear.
–    Instrument may not hold securely.
Effective Management of Surgical Instruments
RATCHET
•    TEST TENSION by closing the instrument gently; when jaws touch, a space of 1/16” or
1/8” should occur between the ratchet teeth of each shank.
•    Close ratchet to first tooth.
•    Hold instrument by jaws and tap against your hand.
•    If instrument springs open, it is an indication of defective ratchet teeth or poor shank
tension.
–    The instrument will not hold tissue, sponges, or needles securely

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

SCISSORS
•    When closed, scissor should meet only at tips.
•    All scissors should operate smoothly.
–    Rough operation implies wear, damage, or failure.
•    Look for burrs on blade tips.
•    Scissors with nicks in the blades should be identified and tagged for repair.
•    Shanks should be in good alignment; if not, the blades may not close smoothly.
Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

•     Many facilities use Theraband (the same latex product that is used for exercise bands) to
test the sharpness of Mayo and Metzenbaum scissors.
–     There are two thicknesses; one for scissors with blades longer than 5 inches and one for
scissors with blades less than 5 inches

Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

NEEDLE HOLDERS

                                             xliii
  •              A needle should be held firmly in place when the needle holder is closed to the lock
  or stop.
  •     If the needle can be twisted or rotated, the needle holder needs repair.
  •     If light can be observed between jaws that are closed and/or locked, the jaws are sprung or
  damaged and will require repair
  Effective Management of Surgical Instruments

  RONGEURS
  •    The cutting edges of a rongeur must be SHARP.
  •    A sharp Kerrison rongeur should take a clean bite out of a 3x5 index card.
  •    Bone-cutting rongeurs should bite through a tongue depressor.
  •    There are commercially available sharpness test kits and standards for surgical instruments.
  Effective Management of Surgical Instrument
  •    Instruments are assembled and placed into containers for sterilization.
  •    All surfaces of each instrument must be exposed to sterilant.



  Short answer responses
  references
  Learning outcome 2: Perform Perioperative Theatre Technical services
1.2.4 Introduction to the learning outcome
    Upon completion of this unit describes the knowledge, skills and attitudes required to
    aadjustment of operating table, anesthetic machines and their operation,Suction machine and
    its operation,Diathermy machine and its operation,Lighting in operation
    theatre,Endoscopy/colonoscopy machine and their operation,Scopes and their operationand
    Operation Theatre accessories and appliances and their us
1.2.5 Performance Standard

1. Operation table is adjusted according to the procedure to be carried out.
2. Anaesthetic machine is operated as per user manual
3. Suction machine is connected as per user manual
4. Diathermy machine is set as per user manual
5. Operation lights are set as per procedure to be done
6. Accessories and appliances are set as per the procedure to be carried out

  Definition of terms




                                                xliv
Adjustment of operating table




                                xlv
The electro hydraulic operating table that has a lift capacity of 1,000 pounds. In fact, this
operating table can be lowered to just 24 inches off the floor in order to accommodate surgeons
who are seated during lengthy operations. Additionally, the table can be equipped with a 180
degree rotating table top for patient imaging access and offers:



Chest plate adjustment
Back plate adjustment
                                            xlvi
Head plate adjustment
Leg plate adjustment
Longitudinal shift
Other flex positioning

Anaesthetic machines and their operation




Describe the preparation of an anesthetic machine and anesthetic for a patient with known
malignant hypothermia susceptibility
Clean the anesthetic machine; remove vaporizers; and replace CO2 absorbant, bellows, and gas
hose. Flush the machine for 20 minutes with 10 L/min of oxygen. Have the MH cart in the
operating room? Schedule the patient for the first case of the day and notify the postanesthetic
care unit to be prepared with an appropriate number of personnel. A cooling blanket should be
placed under the patient. Refrigerated saline should be available. A no triggering anesthetic
technique such as continuous intravenous infusion of propofol should be used. The patient
should be monitored for 6 to 8 hours after surgery.
Suction machine and its operation

In surgery, suction is used to remove blood, saliva, other biological material and foreign detritus
from an anatomical passage or from a working field. A suction-irrigator can simultaneously
perfuse and collect a saline solution where washing is required.

Suction is indispensable to clear the airway of blood, mucous, vomitus or other obstructing
material. Consequently, suction machines can be found in emergency rooms, ambulances,
patient wards and cafeterias.

A central vacuum pump connected to a building-wide network of suction plumbing is termed a
"house vacuum". This is an efficient alternative to multiple small machines distributed
throughout the building. Nevertheless the individual machines are necessary for mobile use and
for backup during failure of a house vacuum.

                                              xlvii
Fluid Flow Path

                            137     filter Fluid Flow Path[edit]

                                      Liq
            Su          Coll          uid           Vac        Vac          Vac         Ex
 Inlet
             cti        ectio         blo           uu         uum          uu          hau
 acce
          ⟶ on        ⟶ n           ⟶ cki         ⟶ m        ⟶ regu       ⟶ m         ⟶ st
 ssor
            tub         vess          ng            gag        lato         pu          filt
   y
              e          el           dev            e           r          mp           er
                                      ice




Disinfecting Your Portable Suction Unit
It is best to follow the manufacturer's guidelines when disinfecting your suction unit, but in
general, the following steps apply:




Disconnect the unit from its power source. Disconnect the battery from the PC board when
cleaning the interior chassis.
Discard all disposable parts, including the canister, tubing, and catheters. Dispose biohazardous
materials appropriately.
                                             xlviii
Use a mild detergent or a mixture of bleach and water (1-part bleach/10 parts water) and rinse
thoroughly.
Follow the instruction manual when disinfecting the mechanics of the unit.
Never submerge the suction unit. Use disinfectant wipes to clean all outer surfaces, including
control knobs, screens and handles.

Don't wait for the end of your shift to disinfect the suction unit. Do it immediately after each
call to ensure it is clean and operational for the next patient.

Don't Forget About Power
Keeping your suction unit functional means ensuring it always has a reliable power source. The
unit is of no use if the batteries are dead. Here are our recommendations:

Check the batteries at the start of each shift.
Test the batteries periodically, per manufacturer’s guidelines.
Replace worn or damaged batteries.
Have plenty of backups on hand, especially for MCIs.
Practice Makes Perfect
Proper maintenance is important, but so is proper training. Here are some ideas for honing your
suction skills:
Incorporate suction technique into code practice scenarios.
Review airway anatomy to maximize suction technique.Know the key differences between
paediatric suction techniques.
Review the dangers and complications associated with improper suctioning.
Be aware of variations in suction catheter size/style and their appropriateness per patient.

Keeping the Unit Safe
Finally, to ensure your portable suction unit is ready for the next airway emergency, it is
important to protect it from damage. This includes:

Avoiding extreme temperatures Keeping the suction unit away from wet or high moisture areas
Securing the unit within your rig to prevent damage while responding Keeping the unit free of
dust and debris
Knowing how to properly clean your portable suction unit is only part of maintaining its overall
health. Practice these recommendations to maximize your unit's efficiency and effectiveness.
Diathermy machine and its operation
Diathermy is the use of high frequency alternate polarity radio-wave electrical current to cut or
coagulate tissue during surgery. It allows for precise incisions to be made with limited blood
loss and is now used in nearly all surgical disciplines.
Diathermy uses high-frequency electric current to produce heat deep inside a targeted tissue. ...
Instead, the waves generated by the machine allow the body to generate heat from within the

                                             xlix
targeted tissue. Diathermy is usually part of a complete physical therapy or rehabilitative
regimen.JunDiathermy is the controlled production of "deep heating" beneath the skin in the
subcutaneous tissues, deep muscles and joints for therapeutic purposes. There are basically two
types of diathermy devices on the market today: radio or high frequency and microwave
Microwave diathermy uses electromagnetic radiation by microwaves and heats to a lesser tissue
depth than short-wave diathermy. It is primarily used to heat superficial muscles and joints such
as the shoulder
There is one basic difference between bipolar and monopolar techniques. With monopolar
electrosurgery, a probe electrode is used to apply the electrosurgical energy to the target tissue
to achieve the desired surgical effect. ... With the bipolar electrosurgical method a bipolar
device, often a set of forceps, is used.
Surgical diathermy machine
In surgical diathermy, a high-frequency electric current (0.5—2 MHz) is used to
produce heat to seal (by coagulation) blood vessels, or to cut and seal at the same
time. The heating can be regulated by a variable resistance.
There are two types of diathermy machine: monopolar and bipolar.
In monopolar machines, the current flows from the active electrode through body
tissue, along the line of least resistance, to a large indifferent plate electrode and
          105
M AINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF LABO R ATO R Y AND HOSPITAL EQUIPM ENT
back to the machine. Different waveforms can be used to produce a cutting or
coagulating mode. For the cutting mode, the waveform is continuous, while for the
coagulating mode, the energy is produced in bursts.
With bipolar diathermy, the two tips of a pair of forceps are the two electrodes;
there is no plate electrode. Coagulation occurs when the forceps are closed across a
piece of tissue. This technique is very good for dealing with very small blood
vessels. The energy output required is low.
Diathermy machines can be classified according to the type of output connection
used.
Isolated output machines have both sides of the output floating with respect to
earth. This minimizes the risk of possible alternative pathways for radiofrequency
current (which can cause burns), or for mains frequency current from the machine
itself (which can electrocute).
Radiofrequency earthed output machines have a capacitor placed between the
plate side of the output and earth. This permits radiofrequency current to flow to
earth. The small value of the capacitor prevents the passage of mains frequency
current so that isolation is effectively preserved at the mains frequency; the risks of
electrocution are not increased by this method. However, the risk of possible
alternative pathways for radiofrequency current to cause burns is greatly increased
and for this reason a plate current monitor is required on such machines. This
monitor senses any difference in current flows between the active and the plate

                                               l
leads, and turns off the output if a difference occurs. The difference represents the
leakage current.
Hard-earthed output machines have a plate electrode directly connected to earth,
so, the patient is also directly connected to earth. This means that the risk of
electrocution is very much higher. For this reason, machines of this design are no
longer produced, and any that are still in use should be replaced.
Maintenance
The routine maintenance needed for these machines is limited. Proper records
should be kept of all work done on them. Make a check-sheet of work to be done,
and then make routine inspections at least twice a year. The most important job is the electrical
safety check. If you do not have an electrical safety checker, follow the instructions in the section
on cardiac monitors
Keep the inside and the outside of the machine clean. Check the plate electrodes, the leads, and
the instruments. Most of the problems will be caused by faulty leads, and in many cases, you
should be able to repair these yourself. The instruments (e.g., diathermy forceps) are unlikely to
give problems, provided that they are checked after each sterilization.




         •   Lighting in operation theatre




Operating lights are a necessary component of any operating theatre or surgical suite and are
available in a variety of different configurations, wattage amounts and features. Avante carries

                                                li
a wide selection of surgery lights including both large, ceiling-mounted operating room lights
and small, portable exam lights. In recent years, older halogen lights have been replaced by
brighter, more energy-efficient LED options. LED surgery lights last longer than traditional
incandescent versions and often incorporate LCD touchscreens to adjust illumination and
spotlight settings.




Repairs, maintenance and medical equipment planning is best delivered by a company who
specializes in the up time of operating room service and support within surgical centres.
Operating rooms are specifically designed for surgeons and surgical staff to perform surgical
procedures that require time, patience, focus, and safety. Various pieces of equipment are
required for use in the operating room. Let ERD be your professional medical equipment
planner, they are vendor neutral.
Surgical Lights – High-quality surgical lighting is essential for performing intricate procedures
in the operating room. Surgical lights are designed to provide bright white light to illuminate the
surgical site and eliminate shadows, all while keeping the surgical staff cool. LED lights or
halogen lights are two types of surgical lights. Surgical lighting is transitioning away from
incandescent technology to LED technology due to the many benefits of LED: pure white
colour, less heat in the surgical field, more accurate colour rendition, and improved shadow
control. Recommended maintenance is 2x per year.




                                               lii
• Endoscopy/colonoscopy machine and their operation
What is endoscopy?
Endoscopy is a procedure in which the gastro-intestinal tract (GI tract) is viewed
through a lighted, flexible tube with a camera at the end (endoscope). Small samples
of tissues cells (biopsy) can also be collected and sent for testing.




                                    liii
In Procedure rooms a clean to dirty workflow must be maintained. The clean area will include
sterile supplies and a write-up space with computer and printer to generate endoscopy reports.
The room may be purpose designed to accommodate the following:
endoscopy 'stack' and video monitor(s) – this equipment contains the light source and video
processor required for the endoscopes to produce images
 endoscope cabinet with clean endoscopes and accessory equipment such as endoscopy biopsy
forceps, snares, injectors
monitoring equipment to allow continuous monitoring of patient condition during procedures
 anaesthetic equipment and medication used to provide procedural sedation or short acting
anaesthetics
 diathermy and/or Argon plasma coagulation equipment
 imaging equipment such as Image Intensifier or C- arm X-ray screening unit depending on
procedures to be performed; imaging equipment may be portable or installed in the room.
Endoscopy Unit
International
Health Facility Guidelines
scope is wiped down and placed in a closed container and transported to the clean-up area; if
any
delay in processing is expected the scopes are soaked in an enzyme detergent solution.
Decontamination includes leak testing, manual pre-cleaning followed by high level disinfection
with
a disinfectant solution.
Endoscope reprocessing areas should be separate to Procedure/ Operating rooms and
unidirectional dirty to clean workflow must be maintained. A centralised reprocessing area is
recommended for efficient handling of endoscopes and appropriate air pressurisation and
ventilation. Cleaning and Disinfection areas must be negatively pressured and ventilated to
remove vapours of chemicals used in the process.
The Cleaning and Disinfection of equipment area will include:
   sinks for soaking and rinsing sufficiently sized to prevent tight coiling of the endoscope
      which may damage the fibre-optic cables in the instrument
   ultrasonic cleaner for accessory equipment used in procedures
   Automated endoscope cleaning/ disinfecting machines
   compressed air to aid drying of endoscopic equipment after cleaning
   handwashing basin
   safety eyewash facility
   stainless steel benches with space to accommodate the length of the endoscopes
   storage for disinfected scopes on a bench or shelf.
The Sterilising/Disinfection area will include an autoclave to sterilise accessory instruments if a
sterile supply service is not available. Storage provisions will include adequately sized areas for
drugs, sterile stock, consumables, linen,

                                               liv
resuscitation trolley and mobile equipment which may include mobile imaging equipment.
Storage of sterile items and scopes close to the point of use is recommended. Scope storage
areas must
be positively pressured and HEPA filtered to prevent contamination of clean endoscopes. Scopes
may be stored in properly ventilated and temperature-controlled cabinets, preferably a
passthrough type, located between reprocessing/ sterilising/disinfection areas and the Operating/
Procedure room. Endoscope cabinets should allow for endoscopes to hang without coiling
preventing damage to either end of the scope.

•    Scopes and their operation
Surgical scope




An operating or surgical microscope is an optical instrument that provides the surgeon with a
stereoscopic, high quality magnified and illuminated image of the small structures in the surgical
area.
The optical components of a basic stereo microscope consist of the binocular head, a
magnification changer, the objective lens and an illuminator which beams light through the
objective lens and onto the operating field (Figures (Figures11 and and2).2). The binocular head
consists of two telescopes with adjustable eyepieces for users with refractive error. The
magnification can be changed by turning a knob (which selects different magnification lenses)
or by using a motorised zoom controlled by a foot pedal.

The working distance (Figure (Figure1)1) is the distance from the microscope objective lens to
the point of focus of the optical system. This value is fixed and is dependent on the chosen focal
length of the objective lens. The choice of working distance depends on the type of surgery. For
modern ophthalmic surgery that involves delicate work in the posterior chamber, objective focal
lengths of 150 mm, 175 mm and 200 mm are commonly used.


The optical system often includes a beam splitter and a second set of teaching binoculars (Figure
(Figure2)2) so that two people can view the operation simultaneously.



                                               lv
The optical system is attached to the suspension arm of the floor stand (Figure (Figure3).3). The
suspension arm makes it possible to position the optics exactly and to fix them in place. The
floor stand has wheels and can be moved around the floor and fixed into place using the brakes.

A foot pedal connected to the floor stand allows the surgeon to control the focus, the zoom, the
position of the optics over the eye (the x,y position on the horizontal plane) and to turn the
illumination on and off.

The illumination system is usually housed in the floor stand in order to keep the bulb heat away
from the operating field. In this case, the light is transmitted to the operating field by means of
a fibre optic cable. The light in ophthalmic micro scopes is usually coaxial, meaning that it
follows the same path as the image in order to avoid shadows.
Procedures requiring scopes includes
Neurosurgery and Spine
Ophthalmology
Otolaryngology (ENT)
Dental
Plastic/Reconstructive Surgery




The surgical microscopes of Leica Microsystems are exactly geared to the requirements of
microsurgery. A compact optical unit delivers clear and sharply focused images and the modular
system gives the surgeon optimum maneuverability


Safety considerations When used in ophthalmology: • Avoid looking directly into the light
source, e.g. into the microscope objective lens or a light guide. Any kind of radiation has a
detrimental effect on biological tissue. This also applies to the light illuminating the surgical
field. • Reduce the brightness and duration of illumination on the surgical field to the absolute
minimum required. • When operating on the eye, always use a protection filter to ensure that the
patient's retina is not exposed to unnecessary (blue) radiation (retinal injury). dr. Chris R. Mol,
BME, NORTEC, 2015 Operating microscope • Stability of stand must be ensured • The system
must be connected to a special emergency backup line supply (in case of power failure)

                                               lvi
•    Operation Theatre accessories and appliances and their use

operating room equipment list for operation theatre
By china care medical | 02 September 2018 | 11 Comments
Are you looking for operating theatre design guidelines for your new clinic or hopsital operating
room?
Do you want to get a operating room equipment list for operating room preparation for surgery?
Do you know the difference between cardiac operation theatre equipment, orthopaedic operating
room, emergency operating room and other operating room equipment ?




                                             lvii
, Surgical Lamp Light
It has the wall mounted and Floor stand type, it shows the wall mounted type in the above
picture.
According to the light source principle. it has the LED, Apertured bulb type, the LED types is
always with longer working life, and brightness.
Bulb type is more cost efficient.
More other types with price, please click her2, x-ray machine
it is a kind of surgery x-ray machine, 2-1 is the control of the x-ray machine, 2-2 is the main unit
of the x-ray machine.
There are different types x-ray machine, from the portable type to stationary type.

3, Surgical table bed
It is used for the patient to sit and lie, it has different types, electric and manual types and for
different surgery type, it has different surgery table for different usage.

                                               lviii
4, patient monitor
it is used for monitoring the patient conditions during surgery.
for adult and patriadic and pregnant patient, there are different types, also different machine can
monitor for different parameters, and different size screen of the machine,

5, Trolley
it is used for putting medicine, instruments and other useful items,
different size and different styles also different material will be influenced the price,




6, Anaesthesia machine
it is used for anaesthesia patient during the surgery,

7, Infusion pump
it is used for infusion patient automated even when patient is without awareness. some models
can be with drug input functions,
8, Pendant
It is used for put patient monitor, endoscope and other surgery items during the surgery.

                                                lix
  there is also other commonly used equipment used for surgery room.
  Suction machine,
  Blood Warmer,
  Defibrillator,
  ECG Machine,
  Electrosurgical Unit,
  Loupe,
  Oxygen Generator,
  Suction Machine,
  Surgery Saw and Drills,
  Ventilator machine,
            Sort answer responses


          References

  Learning outcome 3: Evaluate Perioperative Theatre Technical services
1.2.6 Introduction to the learning outcome
    Upon completion of this unit describes the knowledge, skills and attitudes required to
    Operation Theatre maintenance procedures, Referral of faulty equipment and apparatus and
    Monitoring and evaluation in Operation Theatre.
1.2.7 Performance Standard
    1. Faults committed are identified and rectified or referred as per workplace procedure
    2. Faulty equipment and apparatus are identified and reported to appropriate personnel

  Definition of terms




  Quality improvement
  The OT nurse needs to have enough knowledge on the various instruments for performing risk
  assessments. To be able to view quality work from an overall perspective, the OT nurse needs
  knowledge of quality improvement (QI) on an organizational and health system level, such as


                                              lx
set goals for the care of the intraoperative patient and guidelines from different professional
organizations (Spruce, 2015).

The aim of QI projects is to determine whether the appropriate standards of care are reached in
a specific clinical setting and in relation to an acceptable standard (Baker et al., 2014). The focus
is placed on systems, at local and organizational levels and not on individuals. It is an internal
procedure to cyclically evaluate work processes, which include EBP, clinical effectiveness,
evidence‐based clinical guidelines and audit (Rycroft‐Malone et al., 2002). QI projects usually
do not have theoretical underpinnings; they most commonly do not aim to generate new
knowledge and are not generalizable to all settings (Baker, 2017; Cepero, 2011; Raines, 2012).

The foundation of nursing practice has three components that are closely related to each other,
but with different purposes, QI, EBP and nursing research. QI aims to improve processes, EBP
aims to change practice and nursing research aims to generate new knowledge (Hedges, 2006).
To apply QI, knowledge concerning implementation is essential, which is defined as “methods
to promote the systematic uptake of research findings and other EBPs into routine practice and,
hence, to improve the quality and effectiveness of health services” (Eccles & Mittmann, 2006,
p. 1). There are several different approaches in implementation science (Nilsen, 2015), whereof
i‐PARIHS (implementation—Promoting Action on Research Implementation in Health
Services) is one of the most common in nursing to determine how the improvements can be
detected and measured (Harvey & Kitson, 2016). To evaluate QI, benchmarks are most often
needed, to allow the results to be compared with other entities’ outcomes (Baker, 2017). OT
nurses’ in‐depth nursing care knowledge, academic skills and an ethical approach in the
perioperative context is needed to enable systematic QI.

4.5 Safe care
The fundamentals in systematic safety work are to identify and reduce adverse events to
minimize patient suffering and preventable injuries (Rutberg, Borgstedt‐Risberg, Gustafson, &
Unbeck, 2016). Surgical patients are exposed to several risks during surgery; risk of surgical
site infection due to a planned break in skin integrity and risk of physical injury due to surgical
positioning, electricity, chemicals and transfers (Rauta, Salantera, Nivalainen, & Junttila, 2013).
A large proportion of these surgical complications are avoidable, which was shown when the
World Health Organization (WHO) surgical safety checklist was implemented, after which
mortality was almost halved and complications were significantly reduced. The OT nurse is
responsible for and verbally confirms, sterility, equipment availability, results of needle, sponge
and instruments count and the handling of specimens in the WHO checklist (Haynes et al.,
2009).

There are several areas for which the OT nurse possesses special knowledge and skills and
therefore has special responsibility. Such an area is the prevention of postoperative surgical site
infections. The OT nurse guarantees a hygienic and aseptic environment throughout the
operation by creating a safe and sterile working surface for the use of surgical instruments and
                                                lxi
by draping the patient, thus creating a barrier between the wound and surrounding
microorganisms (Kelvered et al., 2012). Moreover, the OT nurse is also responsible for
controlling the traffic flow in the OT (Blomberg et al., 2015). Door openings during surgery
affect the air pressure in the OR, which may allow contaminated air to flow in and lead to
unacceptable numbers of airborne bacteria‐carrying particles and potentially result in surgical
site infections (Andersson, Bergh, Karlsson, Eriksson, & Nilsson, 2012).

The collection of specimens is common during surgical procedures, aiming to verify or support
the patient's diagnosis (Rauta et al., 2013). The OT nurse is responsible for handling these
specimens; an error can endanger the possibility of diagnosing the patient and planning further
medical treatment.

Surgical counts are another area within the OT nurse's responsibility (McGarvey, Chambers, &
Boore, 2000). The OT nurse's signature in the digital operation notes is a guarantee that surgical
counts and qualitative assessments of the surgical instruments have been performed before the
operation starts, during the procedure before wound closure and after the operation to ensure
that no material (retained foreign body) is accidentally left in the patient. Preventing retained
surgical items is one of the highest priorities in patient safety issues identified by OT nurses
(Steelman, Graling, & Perkhounkova, 2013).

•     Operation Theatre maintenance procedures
OPERATING THEATRE PROCEDURES AND EQUIPMENT
Two things are essential for an operating theatre to run effectively and efficiently.
The first and most important is sterility. The purpose of all the precautions and
care taken in operating theatres is to prevent infection occurring at the time of
operation. This is particularly important for eye surgery where infection is not just
a complication but a disaster. An additional risk in eye surgery is that intraocular
damage may be caused by chemicals or inappropriate irrigating solutions entering
the eye.
The second is teamwork. Surgery is not the work of one important person, “the
surgeon”, with a few other people who are not so important doing what they are
told. It is the work of a whole team. Everybody in the team is equally important
although obviously the surgeon has had a longer training than the others.
The old proverb “the strength of a chain is its weakest link” is particularly true
for operating theatre staff and procedures (see fig. 3.1). It only needs one dirty
instrument to introduce infection to the eye and destroy it. It only needs one
person in theatre to make a mistake with fluids which are irrigated in the eye, to
cause destruction of the corneal endothelium and blindness. Everyone must share
the responsibility for safety and sterility.
The reason for all good surgical practice is to make the operating theatre a safe
place.

                                              lxii
1. Safe for the patient who must be protected from infection and other harm. The patient is the
most important person who needs protection.)
2. Safe for the staff from the risk of needle-stick and other injuries. These can spread Hepatitis,
HIV and other infections. In those parts of the world where hepatitis and HIV infections are
common, “every used needle and sharp instrument is as dangerous as a loaded gun.”
3. Safe for the community by careful and safe disposal of soiled materials, especially sharp
instruments and needles. In developed countries most eye surgery takes place in very
sophisticated
operating theatres dedicated to eye surgery alone, with staff who are fully trained. In developing
countries eye surgery often takes place in general theatres, and some takes place in buildings
which may have other uses and are only temporary
operating theatres. Often the staff are not fully trained and accredited as nurses or
theatre technicians. In spite of these short-comings many surgical teams have to the chain of
successful surgery – if any one link is broken, the surgery will not be successful cope with a
large volume of work and often with very limited facilities. While safety and sterility are
obviously the most important aspects of all theatre work, efficiency is also important because of
the large volume of work.
Another aspect of safety in operating theatres concerns looking after unconscious patients
receiving general anaesthesia, or resuscitating a patient who may have collapsed. Everyone
working in a theatre team should know about “basic life support”. This is how to care for an
unconscious patient or one who has collapsed.
Basic life support means how to maintain a clear airway and how to give artificial respiration to
a patient who has stopped breathing, and how to check the pulse and give cardiac massage to a
patient who has no heart beat. All theatre staff should regularly practise these skills, so as to be
ready if and when an emergency occurs.
At least one member of the theatre team should be trained in “advanced life support”, which
involves taking and interpreting ECG’s, the use of a defibrillator and giving appropriate
intravenous fluids and drugs.
Theatre procedures depend on many different factors: the work-load; the equipment available;
the choice of the surgeon; etc. Eye surgery is practised in many different ways especially in
developing countries. There are some highly effective units with a massive through-put of cases.
On the other hand, there are some surgeons who are only part-time ophthalmologists, and there
are many mobile teams working in temporary accommodation. therefore, this chapter only
discusses basic principles and guide-lines.
The Theatre Team It is important to have an adequate number of motivated and enthusiastic
staff. If they are dedicated to eye surgery, they will have a better understanding of the
requirements of both the surgeon and the patient. A happy relaxed atmosphere and good working
relationships in the theatre team makes the work much more pleasant and mistakes less likely.
The theatre team should have a leader who takes responsibility for organising the work and
making sure all the routine jobs are done regularly. This ensures both the safety and efficiency
of theatre work.For a regular operating list the basic personnel required are:-
1. A scrubbed assistant to look after the sterile instruments and assist the surgeon.
                                               lxiii
   2. An anaesthetic assistant to give the local anaesthetics, prepare the patients and
   if required help with any general anaesthetics.
   3. A circulating nurse to clean and sterilise the instruments and apply the dressings.
   4. A general assistant.
   It is often appropriate that the team leader assumes a fairly basic position, such as
   being the general assistant, in this way he or she can supervise all the other team
   members.
    Eye Surgery in Hot Climates
   Operating Theatre Routine
   There are a variety of important jobs that must be done to keep a theatre well
   stocked and maintained. Many of these are rather obvious, but without maintenance equipment
   will break down, and without planning spare parts and consumable materials will run out and
   take a long time to be replaced.
   The general routine will include:
   1. Building maintenance.
2. Cleaning.
3. Maintenance of equipment and instruments.
4. Manufacture of dressings and drapes.
5. Sterilisation and disinfection procedures.
6. Stock-keeping, storage and security.
1. Building maintenance
A good sound building is an obvious requirement for safe surgery. Eye surgery can
be performed in a great variety of buildings which are not purpose-built operating theatres.
However, the room should be as insect-proof as possible and well ventilated. It does not have to
be blacked-out, although the windows should be shaded. Paint work should be in good condition
and a secure water supply present.
   The room should have doors that can be closed during surgery. Regular inspections of the insect-
   proofing are important.
   2. Cleaning
   General cleaning should be carried out regularly in addition to preparations on the
   day of surgery. Floors and sometimes walls and ceilings must be washed in all
   rooms used as part of the operating theatre suite. Any furniture including instrument tables,
   operating tables and cabinets must be wiped clean to avoid the build
   up of dust.
   Spilt blood or other debris should be wiped up as soon as possible,because once dried it may be
   difficult to remove. A weak solution of bleach is adequate for cleaning purposes and will kill
   most micro-organisms including the HIV virus.
   Anyone who washes drapes and surgical instruments MUST wear gloves to protect themselves
   from the risk of infection.
   3. Maintenance of equipment and instruments
   Equipment can only function if it is regularly maintained. A schedule needs to be

                                               lxiv
drawn up for items such as sterilisers, operating lights and air conditioners. The
importance of having spares to enable quick repairs to be carried out locally cannot
be stressed too much. Surgical instruments need to be carefully looked after and
checked that they are working properly.
Operating Theatre Procedures and Equipment 41
4. Manufacture of dressings and drapes
Eye pads.
With modern surgery and small self-sealing incisions, patients are no longer routinely given an
eye pad postoperatively. However, many patients still require an eye pad postoperatively and
outpatients may also be padded as part of their treatment. The purpose of the eye pad is to protect
the eye in the immediate post-operative period. It also prevents the patient or his attendants from
interfering with the eye and keeps flies out. It prevents eye-lid movements against the eye and
applies gentle pressure which will encourage haemostasis and wound closure.
An eye-pad is not a substitute for poor surgery, and it is rarely necessary to keep an eye
padded for more than 2 days postoperatively.
The cost of buying ready-made pads is high and there are inevitable delays as a result of ordering
supplies. Eye pads can be manufactured locally using cotton wool and gauze. A layer of gauze
is placed on a table and onto this is put a layer of cotton wool about 2 cm thick. A further layer
of gauze goes on top of the cotton wool making a cotton wool sandwich enclosed in gauze.Then,
using a simple card shape as a guide, eye pads can be cut out.
These are placed into an autoclave box or bin for sterilization. The technique for applying pads
is simple but important. The pad needs to be placed so that the eye-lids will not be able to open.
If the eyelids open under the pad, the pad will rub against the cornea and this will harm the eye
and not protect it.
The pad is placed diagonally over the closed lids. If the eye is very deeply set it is best to fold
the pad in half and place it so that the folded edge fits below the eyebrow. The pad is taped
firmly in place using three strips of adhesive tape, ideally 1 cm wide and positioned.
Added protection can be provided by a plastic eye-shield. These can be bought or made locally
from old X-ray plates or cardboard.
In most surgical cases it is safer to bandage the eye with elasticated or crepe Applying an eye
pad How to make a simple eye shield from X-ray plates
5. Sterilisation and Disinfection Procedures
The sterilising of instruments, swabs, linen and eye-pads is by far the most
important step in safe surgery. Sterilisation means that all living micro-organisms,
bacteria, viruses, fungi etc. including spores have been killed. Disinfection means
that bacteria which are likely to cause infection have been killed, but spores and
some very resistant micro-organisms may survive disinfection. Obviously sterilisation is better
than disinfection. There are four common ways of sterilising or disinfecting.
Methods of Sterilisation and Disinfection
          1. Autoclave
          2. Dry heat oven
          3. Boiling
                                              lxv
  4. Immersion in chemical solutions
  Autoclaving and the dry heat oven will sterilise, and boiling and chemical solutions
  will only disinfect. However, the methods of sterilisation may only disinfect if the
  treatment is not applied for long enough, and a chemical which disinfects may sterilise after a
  long period of immersion. Instruments must first be cleaned before sterilising. The best time for
  cleaning
  instruments is immediately after they have been used, otherwise blood and secretions may
  become dried and encrusted. Dried blood and secretions are much more difficult to remove, and
  they prevent spores and bacteria from being killed by the sterilisation process. Instruments
  should be washed with soap and water using a soft brush or cloth, paying particular attention to
  the joints of scissors, artery forceps and needle holders. They should then be rinsed in clean
  water.
  If instruments are going to be stored or sterilised using dry heat or chemicals, they should
  also be carefully dried. Theatre linen and drapes can be washed at the end of the
  list and left to dry in the sun.
  1. Autoclave
  The autoclave is by far the safest, best and most reliable way of sterilisation. It is the only
  effective way of sterilising surgical drapes and dressings, and is
  the best way to sterilise surgical instruments. If used properly it is guaranteed to kill
  both bacteria and spores. The autoclave produces water vapour at pressures in
  excess of 1 atmosphere, and this enables temperatures up to 134 degrees Centigrade to be
  achieved. The higher the pressure, the higher is the temperature at




Operating Theatre Procedures and Equipment


A Heavy needle holder for large needles
B Fine needle holder for fine needles
C Conjunctival scissors
D Intraocular scissors (Vanna’s)
E Right and left corneal scissors
F Iridectomy scissors (DeWecker’s)
G Razor blade fragment holder
H Scalpel blade (Bard-Parker)
I Heavy toothed forceps
J Conjunctival forceps
K Fine corneo-scleral forceps with teeth at the tip
L Fine corneo-scleral forceps with cups at the tip
M Curved fine corneo-scleral forceps
N Intraocular forceps for handling the lens capsule (Kelman McPherson)
                                               lxvi
O Capsule forceps for intracapsular extraction (Arruga)
P Fine suture tying forceps
Q Right and left lens expressor
R Lens loop
S Iris repositor
T Hot point cautery for use with spirit lamp
U Irrigating cystitome
V Adjustable light speculum
X 2-way irrigating/aspirating cannula for extracapsular extraction
Y Intraocular swabs
Z 2 cc and 5 cc syringes
46 Eye Surgery in Hot Climates
A basic set of instruments for intraocular surgery
Operating Theatre Procedures and Equipment 47
A Needle holder
B Straight scissors
C Curved spring scissors
D Scalpel blade
E Squint hooks
F Fine straight artery forceps
G Curved artery forceps
H Conjunctival forceps without teeth
I Heavy toothed forceps
J Fine toothed forceps
K Battery cautery
L Meibomian cyst lid clamp
M Small curette
N Eyelid retractor (Desmarres)
O Eyelid guard
P Large eyelid clamp
Q Eyelid clamp (Cruikshank or Erhardt)
R Adjustable speculum (Laing)
48 Eye Surgery in Hot Climates
A basic set of instruments for extraocular surgery on the eyelids
Operating Theatre Procedures and Equipment 49
autoclaving has been completed satisfactorily. Special care should be taken when
using an autoclave with attention to correct procedures and safety. The reservoir
should be checked and kept at the right level. Only distilled or rain water should be
used. Correct venting is essential although many autoclaves vent themselves at the
end of the cycle. All staff using the autoclave require training and must strictly
adhere to the instruction manual.

                                               lxvii
2. Dry Heat Oven
A hot air oven is quite expensive but requires very little maintenance and is a very
effective way of sterilising instruments. It will preserve the edge of delicate cutting
   instruments better than an autoclave. However, instruments must be scrupulously
   clean and dry first, and the process is very slow. It takes 1 hour at 180 degrees
   Centigrade to sterilise instruments, and then the instruments must be left to cool.
   3. Boiling
   The great advantage of boiling is that it is very quick, simple, easy and cheap.
   However, boiling does not sterilise, it only disinfects. Boiling for 10 minutes will kill
   all bacteria but it will not kill spores. Although this is a problem in theory it is not
a real problem in practice. However, boiling has two particular disadvantages:
1. Repeated boiling will cause tarnishing and corrosion of instruments and will
certainly, damage the cutting edge of fine instruments. Corrosion is lessened by
adding 2% sodium carbonate to the solution. If possible, distilled water should be
used and not tap water. This is available commercially from garages as water for car
batteries. Distilled water will not cause corrosion.
2. After boiling the instruments are wet. They can be dried with a sterile gauze but
this might compromise sterility and will break the “no touch technique” rule of
not touching the instrument end that enters the eye. If they are used when wet,
water from the handle of the instrument will drip down on to the working end
and again, compromise the no touch “technique”. If the instruments are placed
in the boiler in a perforated rack or tray, then they will dry automatically and
not require handling. In emergencies, drapes can be sterilised by boiling and
then squeezed dry, although this is certainly not a technique to be recommended.
4. Chemical Solutions
Most chemical solutions are effective against bacteria but not against spores, and
so they only disinfect but do not sterilise. However, if the instruments are left in the
chemical for long enough they may indeed sterilise. Chemical sterilisation and
disinfection is good at preserving sharp instruments but there are two main
disadvantages.
1. These chemical disinfectants are very toxic especially to the inside of the eye,
and the instruments must be thoroughly rinsed in sterile water and dried very
carefully after immersion in the chemical. This again will break the “no touch
technique” rule.
2. With time or use, the solution may lose some of its potency, or may become
chemically inactivated, or the alcohol in alcohol based chemicals may evaporate.
50 Eye Surgery in Hot Climates
The most commonly used solutions are Chlorhexidine (trade name Hibitane) or
Chlorhexidine and Cetrimide combined (trade name Savlon).
Hibitane is available as a 5% concentrate and needs to be diluted 10 times with
70% alcohol to make a solution which is 0.5% Chlorhexidine (Hibitane) in 70%
alcohol and 30% water (i.e. one part of concentrate for 9 parts of 70% alcohol).
                                                 lxviii
Savlon is available as a concentrate containing 1.5% Chlorhexidine and
15% Cetrimide and needs to be diluted thirty times in 70% alcohol (1 part of
concentrate for 29 parts of 70% alcohol).
Both of these solutions should disinfect instruments after 10 minutes. After
prolonged usage some of the alcohol may evaporate and the solution may lose its
strength. If alcohol is not available concentrated Savlon diluted 1:30 in boiled
water will disinfect instruments after 30 minutes.
Povidone Iodine is another widely used disinfecting agent, which is effective
against most micro -organisms. A 10% solution can be made as follows :
Take 500ml of distilled water (cooled, boiled rain water is an alternative)
Add sodium phosphate 16.6 gms and citric acid 3.4gms(these act as a chemical
buffer)
Then add 50 gms of Povidone Iodine, thus making a 10% solution.This will also
disinfect instruments after 10 minutes.
A 10% solution of Povidone Iodine can be used for cleaning the eyelids and the
conjunctival sac preoperatively, but if it is left in the conjunctival sac for some time,
some people think that 5% is safer.
Formalin vapour is an effective sterilising agent against all micro-organisms and
spores. It is supplied as formalin tablets, which are placed in an airtight container
at a warm room temperature. 12 hours are required for sterilisation.
The sterilisation of cryoprobes often presents a problem. They can only be
autoclaved at lower temperatures and so will take half an hour for the cycle.
Cryoprobes are quite often sterilised by immersion in chemical solutions between
patients on the same list. As the probe actually enters the eye great care must be
taken both to wash off all these chemicals, and also to make sure that the probe is
not in any way contaminated. A small portable cryoprobe used with freon gas can
however be safely boiled. (Do not boil the cylinder of gas itself, as it will explode!)
Sterilised instruments, drapes and dressings can be safely stored and transported in sealed
autoclave bins and trays. If such bins or trays are not available all
items must be double wrapped in linen before sterilisation and can then be safely
stored or transported.
Stock keeping, Storage and Security
Good stock keeping to maintain essential supplies is often overlooked. However its
importance cannot be over emphasised especially when there may be long delays
between ordering supplies and their arrival. A system of monitoring stores and the
rate at which consumables such as medicines, dressings, sutures etc. are used will
allow for ordering and budgeting. Money is always limited so there is no place for
holding excessive quantities. The only way to be aware of annual usage and any
seasonal variations in consumption is to have a strict system of stock keeping.This
Operating Theatre Procedures and Equipment 51
important part of theatre management should be the responsibility of the person in
charge of the theatre.
                                               lxix
It is obvious that equipment and supplies should be stored in a place where they
will not deteriorate, and where they are safe.
Managing with Limited Resources
In many circumstances the volume of surgical work or financial limitations mean
that correct theatre procedures cannot be followed strictly. In correct theatre
procedures everybody who enters the operating theatre and all the staff and
patients should wear a complete change of clothes. All those operating scrub up
completely between cases with fresh gloves and a fresh gown. Often it may not be
possible to maintain these standards. The patients may have to come to the
operating theatre wearing their own clothes.The surgical staff should always scrub
up completely at the beginning of a list, but may be obliged just to change their
gloves in between cases or even to wipe their gloves in alcohol between cases. In
order to maintain surgical through put it may be necessary to have more than one
operating table in the same operating room.
To ensure safe surgery there are four areas in which “cutting corners” and
compromises are strictly forbidden.These are:
1. Correct preparation of the patient for surgery, with a thorough cleaning of the
face and skin preparation around the eye (see pages 57–8). This includes
“marking” the eye for surgery to avoid mistakes.
2. Sterilisation of all instruments, drapes and dressings. If an item like an
intraocular lens comes from the manufacturer in a sterile wrapping, then make
sure that the packaging has not in any way been damaged.
3. Sterilisation and purity of all solutions used in intraocular irrigation.
4. The correct handling of instruments and dressings and the use of a “no touch
technique”. Nothing that enters the eye should touch the eyelids or lashes.
People working in small units, or on tour in rural areas may have to rely on boiling
and chemicals as the only means of disinfecting between cases. Although this is not
the best way it appears to be safe as long as everyone sticks to the rules. Some
people will boil the blunt instruments and use chemicals for the sharps.
• Don’t try to shorten the time needed for immersion in chemicals or boiling.
• Make sure that the chemical solution is fresh.
• Make sure that the instruments are dried with a sterile swab and there is no
chemical residue on the instruments. This should be done by someone who
understands how important this is.
• Never rely on just wiping the instruments between cases with spirit,
ether or acetone. It just isn’t safe enough.
52 Eye Surgery in Hot Climates
Infection Control Strategy
Post-operative infections do sometimes occur, even with the most careful and well
trained surgical team. Good units have an infection rate of about one case in a
thousand or less. It is reasonable to assume that any infection developing within
the first post-operative week has been contracted at the time of the operation. Even
                                               lxx
an isolated case of post-operative infection should make the surgeon and the
surgical team review all their techniques, equipment and procedures. If several
infections occur close to each other an even more radical overhaul of theatre
procedures is required. Any irrigating fluids should be discarded and a new batch
obtained. All made up disinfectant solutions should be discarded and new ones
made, and the steriliser changed or a new method of sterilisation tried. If available
an infection control officer or a microbiology department will help to trace the
source of an infection.The following is a list of the more common possible sources
of infection during surgery:
Sources of Infection
From the patient Conjunctivitis.
Blepharitis.
Dacryocystitis.
Septic lesion near the eye.
From the staff Septic lesions.
Poor scrubbing up.
Contaminated gloves.
Failure to observe ″no touch technique″ by the
surgeon or assistant, or touching the lids or
lashes with instruments entering the eye.
Prolonged manipulation during the operation.
From the theatre equipment Contaminated irrigating fluid.
Faulty steriliser.
Faulty sterilising technique.
Contamination of sterile trolleys e.g. from flies.
Contamination or inactivation of disinfectant
solutions.
Broken or defective packaging for an IOL or
instrument which is factory sterilised.
   •    Referral of faulty equipment and apparatus
   Ensure that defective equipment is taken out of service, clearly labeled and disinfected, and that
   proper validation is performed once equipment is repaired
   When equipment is broken and needs repair, it is highly important to eliminate the risk of the
   person performing the repair becoming infected with pathogenic organisms. Besides, it must be
   clear to everybody that the equipment is defect which prevents that people still try to use the
   defective equipment, creating potential hazards to the equipment, the person using it and the test
   result.




  You have to be certain that equipment that is returned into service after being repaired is able to
  perform correctly and delivers good quality and true results.
                                                lxxi
Write an SOP that provides all the procedures that must be followed when a piece of equipment
is defective; from disinfection and removal from the laboratory to returning into the laboratory
following proper validation. Include in this SOP at least the following:

Procedure for disinfecting the equipment, including specification of when it should be
disinfected.
Procedure ensuring that equipment is clearly labeled as defective directly after detecting that it
is broken, preventing further use of the equipment. This label must also indicate if the equipment
has been disinfected.
Procedure for ensuring appropriate packaging when the equipment needs to be transported,
preventing further damage to the equipment.
Procedure for ensuring that adequate repair is done according to the SOPs in which the
procedures for maintenance of the broken piece of equipment are described (including recording
of repairs in the equipment files).
Procedure that has to be followed when equipment is returned into service again after reparation:
verification that the equipment is able to achieve the predefined performance requirements and
that it is able to deliver a true and high quality result (which is called validation of equipment).
In the right-hand column you can find background information regarding equipment repair and
maintenance from the WHO Laboratory Quality Management System (LQMS) handbook.




With regard to the last point: As the performance requirements differ per piece of equipment
you cannot define these in the SOP. Therefore, include a form for recording that validation has
happened. This form is similar to the equipment reception checklist (attached to the SOP for
Procurement and Reception of Equipment): it is used to verify that the piece of equipment is
able to achieve performance requirements formulated by you. Hence the form must have space
allocated for formulation of performance requirements to which the piece of equipment must be
tested and must comply with. Make sure the form guides the person validating the equipment
through the whole process in a stepwise manner.




After finishing the validation the person should sign the form and give the form to the Equipment
Officer for archiving in the equipment file. This form will be an appendix of the SOP.




                                              lxxii
           •   Monitoring and evaluation in Operation Theatre

           Hospital-centric Metrics There are several performance measures of ORs, which are
           of special interest to the hospital involved due to their impact on productivity or
           revenue. Since these measures do not take into consideration the experience of
           patients who have undergone surgeries, we collectively define them as hospital-
           centric metrics. Some of the commonly cited hospital-metric metrics include OR
           utilisation, throughput, waiting time of surgeons, overtime costs, contribution margin,
           and makespan as defined and illustrated the bellow
           Metric Description
           OR utilization Ratio of time spent* by patients in OR to total OR time available
           Throughput Number of surgical cases per unit time
           Waiting time of surgeons Length of time spent by surgeons waiting prior to the start
           of their procedure.
           Overtime costs Additional costs incurred due to performance of surgeries beyond the
           standard operating hours
           Contribution margin is typically computed in terms of dollar per unit
           OR time and is the revenue generated by a surgical case
  Learning outcome 2: Decontamination in Operation Theatre instrument and apparatus
1.2.8 Introduction to the learning outcome
 Upon completion of this unit describes the knowledge, skills and attitudes required to
   Decontamination in Operation Theatre instrument and apparatuses-arrangement of theatre
   room,Referral of faulty equipment and apparatus and Documentation of Operation Theatre
   technical service

                                               lxxiii
1.2.9  Performance Standard
    1. Used Instruments and equipment are decontaminated according to WHO standards
    2. Theatre room is rearranged in accordance with work place set- up
    3. Faulty apparatuses and instruments are referred to maintenance department according to
       work place policy
    4. Technical services are documented in accordance with work place procedures
    5. Waste is disposed with due regard to environment protection regulations

  Definition of terms



  Standards of Practice for the Decontamination of Surgical Instruments
  Introduction
  The following Standards of Practice were researched and authored by the AST Education
  and Professional Standards Committee and have been approved by the AST Board of
  Directors. They are effective April 16, 2009.
  AST developed the Standards of Practice to support healthcare facilities in the
  reinforcement of best practices related to the decontamination of surgical instruments in
  the perioperative setting. The purpose of the Standards is to provide an outline that the
  Certified Surgical Technologist (CST) and Certified First Assistant (CSFA) can use to
  develop and implement policies and procedures for the decontamination of surgical
  instruments. The Standards are presented with the understanding that it is the
  responsibility of the healthcare facility to develop, approve and establish policies and
  procedures for cleaning and disinfecting surgical instruments according to established
  healthcare facility protocols.Rationale
  The following are Standards of Practice related to the proper decontamination of surgical
  instruments (henceforth, simply referred to as instruments) in the perioperative setting.
  Instruments that are opened on the sterile field, whether used or not used, during the
  surgical procedure must be thoroughly decontaminated prior to disinfection and/or
  sterilization. The terms cleaning and decontamination are often used synonymously to
  indicate a physical and chemical process of removal of organic material, soil and debris,
  and microorganisms from inanimate objects, such as instruments. The term cleaning
  frequently, as indicated in the prior sentence, refers to the removal of microorganisms as
  opposed to killing. However, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration defines
  decontamination as, “the use of physical or chemical means to remove, inactivate, or
  destroy blood-borne pathogens on a surface or item to the point where they are no longer
  capable of transmitting infectious particles and the surface or item is rendered safe for
  handling, use, or disposal.”27 For the remainder of this document, the terms cleaning and
  decontamination will be used synonymously, and the OSHA definition will apply to both
  terms, meaning the process removes, inactivates or destroys microorganisms.
  When performed properly, cleaning effectively reduces the bioburden in order to prepare

                                              lxxiv
the instruments for disinfection and sterilization. The importance of this step cannot be
overemphasized since organic material, soil, and debris can block the disinfectant or
sterilizing agent from making complete contact with the surface of the instruments.
Additionally, cleaning allows for the safe handling of the instruments by healthcare
workers (HCWs).
Standard of Practice I
The cleaning of instruments should begin during the surgical procedure to prevent
drying of blood, soil and debris on the surface and within lumens.
1. The CST in the first scrub role should keep the instruments free of debris and
blood during the surgical procedure.
A. The instruments should be wiped clean using a sterile, water-moistened
sponge. Care must be taken that the sponge is not used on the tissues of the patient.
B. Instruments with lumens should be flushed with a sterile, water-filled
syringe to remove blood and debris and prevent drying of the gross soil.
C. Instruments that may not be used for the remainder of procedure, eg,
acetabular reamers used during a total hip arthroplasty, may be placed into
a basin containing sterile water to soak.
D. Saline must not be used, since the chloride ions can cause pitting and
deterioration of the finish on the surface of the instruments.
Standard of Practice II
The cleaning of instruments should continue at the point of use post-procedure,
including sorting and disassembly of instruments, containment and transportation
the decontamination room.
1. Post-procedure, after removal of the sterile gown and gloves, the CST should
wear personal protective equipment (PPE) when breaking down the sterile back
table.
2. Instruments should never be soaked in saline or sodium hypochlorite (bleach)
solution. The chloride ions in both solutions are highly corrosive, causing the
breakdown of the finish on instruments, as well as the metal.
A. It is recommended that soaking soiled instruments begin in the OR at the
completion of the procedure. The instruments can be placed in a basin
containing a mixture of sterile water and enzymatic detergent. Refer to the
manufacturer’s instructions for the correct amounts of sterile water and
enzymatic detergent to be mixed.
3. All instruments that were on the sterile field, whether used or not used, are
considered contaminated, and a possible source of microorganisms that could
cause an infection in HCWs and patients.
A. All instruments must be properly separated and placed in leakproof,
puncture-resistant containers that are marked with a biohazard label to
allow easy identification by other HCWs that the contents are
contaminated and therefore hazardous.

                                             lxxv
(1) The infection hazard to the surgical team members is greatest during the handling and
separation of contaminated instruments at the point of use. However, separation is best done in
the OR by the CST who is familiar with the back table set up, including location of the sharps
container, as well as other sharps such as trocars in order to prevent injury to other surgical team
members.(2) A sponge moistened with water should be used to wipe gross soil and blood from
the instruments that were used during the surgical procedure. It is recommended not to clean the
instruments within a water-filled basin in order to prevent splashing of the fluid on the floor or
other surfaces of the OR
(3) Ringed instruments should be placed in a carrier arranged in single layers or placed on
stringers. Box locks should be opened.Assembled instruments should be taken apart. Heavy
instruments and delicate instruments, such as microsurgical instruments should be placed in
separate trays.
(4) Reusable sharp instruments with points or edges should be placed in a separate puncture-
resistant, closable container.
(5) Instruments should be kept wet in the transport container by covering with a water-soaked
towel or spray, foam or gel product specifically intended for this purpose. The instruments
should not be transported in the water and enzymatic soaking solution in order to prevent
splashing and reduce the weight of the transportcontainer.
The enzymatic solution should be properly discarde according to surgery department policy by
the CST who is wearing PPE.
B. Contaminated instruments should be contained during transport from the point of use to the
decontamination area.
(1) Contaminated instruments should be handled as little as possible at the point of use and
should be immediately contained and transported to the decontamination area. Immediate
containment
and transport reduces the risk of surgical personnel’s contact with the contaminated instruments.
(2) Containment should be achieved through the use of some type of container that has been
identified to prevent surgical personnel and other HCWs from contact with the contaminated
instruments and prevention of airborne microorganisms during transport.
The type of container to be used depends on the items to be transported. Types of recommended
containers include closed carts, bins with lids, rigid sterilization container systems, and
impermeable bags that can be used alone or in combination.
(3) Rigid sterilization container systems with intact, dry filters and closed valves are an accepted
method for the transportation of contaminated instruments. However, the use of the container
for
transportation purposes should be confirmed by consulting the manufacturer’s instructions.
Some manufacturers recommend not using the same container for transporting contaminated
instruments that is also used for the sterilization of the instruments.
(4) The rigid sterilization container system requires no additional covering, unless the external
surfaces have been contaminated with blood and/or body fluids. If the container has been
handled

                                              lxxvi
  and touched by a person who has had contact with blood or body fluids, such as the CST, it
   should be assumed it is contaminated.In this instance, the container should be enclosed in a red
  biohazard bag, bin with a lid or closed cart.
    When purchasing arigid sterilization container system, the healthcare facility should
  consult the manufacturer’s information to confirm if the container can be easily and effectively
   decontaminated.
  (5) The external surfaces of bins with lids, closed carts and other containers should be
   decontaminated after each use with an Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) - registered,
  intermediate-level disinfectant. The containers should bethoroughly wiped down externally and
   internally. The use of a cart wash system is recommended for decontaminating closed carts.
   Additionally, routine cleaning of the case cart wheels should be performed to remove string and
   other debris to maintain the easy movement of the wheels.
  Standard of Practice III
  Cleaning/detergent agents should be selected that will not damage the cleaning equipment and
   effectively clean instruments.
  1. The chemicals in the cleaning agent(s) should not be corrosive to the cleaning equipment
   including the ultrasonic cleaner, washer-decontaminator, or washersterilizer.
  2. The chemicals in the cleaning agent(s) should not cause electrolytic action between the
   instruments and cleaning equipment.
  3. The cleaning agent(s) should not be corrosive and damaging to the instruments.
  4. Cleaning agent(s) should be easily removed from the instruments by rinsing with water in
   order to avoid residual chemicals that could corrode and damage the instruments as well as
   present a danger to the patient.
  5. It is recommended to select a detergent with a pH between 7-10 to use in the cleaning of
   instruments.16 Detergents that have a pH of higher than 7 are more effective in the removal of
   organic debris such as blood, fat and feces.
  6. Antimicrobial solutions, such as iodophors that are used for skin antisepsis,should never be
   used for cleaning instruments.
  7. Manufacturer’s instructions for the use of detergents should always be followed.
  The instructions should be kept on file and accessible at all times by HCWs.
  8. The following are the ideal characteristics of a cleaning agent.
A. Low sudsing/foaming
B. Easily rinsed off
C. Disperse organic soil
D. Biodegradable
E. Nontoxic
F. Nonabrasive
G. Effective on all types of organic soil
H. Cost-effective
I. Long shelf life
  Standard of Practice IV
  Cleaning may be performed manually, mechanically or a combination of both. The
                                              lxxvii
selection of the cleaning method should be based upon the type of device and manufacturer’s
recommendations. However, cleaning alone may not be sufficient to decontaminate items that
present a high risk of disease transmission such as surgical instruments and therefore, should
undergo a microbicidal process.
1. The manufacturer should provide written instructions for the reprocessing of the instrument(s)
or device(s) that include recommendations for the type of cleaning method to be used, type of
cleaning equipment and cleaning agent(s).
A. The cleaning method should not affect the function of the instruments or
devices and should be safe to use by HCWs.
B. The manufacturer’s instructions should be kept on file and accessible at all times by HCWs.
C. Prior to HCWs using cleaning equipment and/or cleaning agents that are not recommended
by the manufacturer for particular instruments or devices, the HCW should contact the
manufacturer for recommendations,as well as contact the manufacturers of the cleaning
equipment and cleaning agent(s).
2. Manual cleaning is recommended for delicate instruments and devices, such as microsurgical
instruments, lensed instruments, power equipment, and other instruments that cannot tolerate an
automated cleaning process.
A. Immersible instruments and devices should be kept submerged in the water to prevent
aerosolization. Non-immersible instruments and devices should be cleaned according to the
manufacturer’s instructions.
B. The water with detergent should be kept at a temperature in a range of 27º
C to 44º C (80º F – 110º F). Temperatures over 110º F cause coagulation and thus prevent
removal of protein substances. Water temperatures that are too cold may not activate the
detergent.
C. After cleaning, instruments and devices should be thoroughly rinsed to remove detergent
residue and debris.
(1) Rinsing is extremely important, because residuals can reduce the efficacy of the disinfection
and sterilization processes and possibly cause damage to the tissues of the surgical patient.
D. Scouring pads and abrasive cleaning agents should not be used for cleaning instruments and
devices in order to prevent damage to the items.
E. Only brushes designated for use in cleaning instruments and devices should be purchased by
the healthcare facility.
(1) Reusable brushes create a risk for cross-contamination.Reusable brushes should be cleaned
and decontaminated at least daily or when heavily soiled. Brushes that show wear should be
discarded.
(2) Brushes used to clean instruments and devices with lumens must be the correct size. If the
brush is too large, it will not properly fit into the lumen; if shoved into the lumen it could damage
the
instrument or device and possibly become stuck within. If too small, the brush will not make
complete contact with the lumen’s surface and prevent thorough cleaning.


                                              lxxviii
F. A three-sink method should be used for manual cleaning: A sink with tap water and detergent;
second sink with tap water for rinsing; third sink with distilled/de-ionized water as a second
rinse to aid in preventing staining.
3. The use of mechanical cleaning equipment is recommended as the primary method for
decontamination of instruments and devices that can withstand theprocess. Mechanical cleaning
equipment provides the advantage of exposing the instruments and devices to a microbicidal
process.
A. The use of mechanical cleaning equipment significantly reduces theamount of contact time
between the HCW and contaminated items.
 B. Thermal disinfection can be accomplished with the use of washersanitizers, washer-
decontaminators, washer-disinfectors, and washersterilizers. Washer sanitizers provide the
lowest level of disinfection, and washer-sterilizers offer the highest level of disinfection.
(1) Thermal disinfection should only be used to render items safe to handle by HCWs not
wearing PPE and not as a process in which they are ready for reuse in surgery. Critical items
should always be put through a sterilization process as well as semi-critical items should be
either sterilized or high level disinfected.
(2) To ensure proper functioning of the equipment, routine maintenance should be performed
according to the manufacturer’s instructions, the strainer should be cleaned on a daily basis, and
the operating instructions provided by the manufacturer should be followed.
(3) Time and temperature should be monitored and documented.
(4) HCWs must be careful when removing hot items from the equipment in order to avoid burns.
The items may be wet with hot water. Additionally, water that drips on the floor may make it
slippery; the water should be wiped from the floor.




                                             lxxix
         •   Re-arrangement of theatre room




he circulator should check the operating room schedule the day before surgery for any changes
that may have been made. The operating room specialist should be in the assigned room in
plenty of time to prepare for the surgical procedure.

Centralized Materiel Service should be notified of any special equipment and/or instruments
that may be needed for the case that are not readily available.

b. Personal cleanliness is extremely important for the operating room specialist.

Before performing the duties described in the following paragraphs for preparation of the
operating room, the circulator should wash his hands thoroughly and don a surgical hat. The
surgical cap must cover the hair completely to prevent possible contamination of the sterile area
by falling hair or dandruff. He should then don a clean, cotton scrub suit before entering the
semi-restricted areas of the surgical suite.

Before entering a restricted area, the OR specialist must don a surgical mask per local SOP. The
mask protects the patient from bacteria exhaled by operating room personnel. The mask must


                                             lxxx
fit snugly around the nose and mouth to filter the air through it rather than around the sides of
the mask. The mask should be changed whenever it becomes damp and after each procedure.

The correct procedures for donning scrub suit, surgical hat, shoe covers, and surgical mask are
provided in detail in Subcourse MD0933, Scrub, Gown, and Glove Procedures, which you
should have studied prior to this subcourse. Now you are ready to prepare the operating room
for surgery.

c. Damp dust the operating room unless this has already been done by personnel on the previous
shift.

Concurrent with dusting, check equipment, arrange furniture, and restock supplies. After damp
dusting with a cloth soaked in disinfectant solution prescribed by local policy, wet vacuum the
floor using a disinfectant prescribed by local policy. Dry dusting and mopping is never done in
the operating room because it raises dust that contains bacteria.

(1) Damp dusting should be done before the first scheduled incision time of the day.

(2) Establish and follow a definite order when damp dusting furniture. Start with the tallest
equipment and work down since this method helps the settling of airborne microorganisms.
Damp dust the operating room overhead light first, then the operating table. Work from the
center of the room to the perimeter (outer limits) and from the tallest item to the lowest. If you
are called from the room, leave the damp dusting cloth on the item being dusted; this will serve
as the starting point when resuming dusting duties.

(3) As the damp dusting is accomplished, set up the equipment and check each item for proper
functioning. This will save time and energy. This includes such things as:

(a) Switch on the overhead light to ensure proper functioning.

(b) Check the operating table for proper working order.

(c) Check the suction machine, the electrosurgical unit, and other pieces of equipment in the
operating room whether or not they are to be used.

(d) Line the kick buckets with plastic bags.

(e) Check the supply cabinets for stock. Restock, if necessary.

(4) Consult with the scrub on the arrangement of the furniture for the surgical procedure. In
general, the area chosen for the sterile setup should be away from doorways and traffic. It should
be in the most closed-in area away from the cabinets that are to be opened during the setup. As
                                               lxxxi
damp dusting continues, arrange the furniture for the sterile setup so that the scrub can work
within the sterile field and the circulator can work outside the field.

d. Check with the scrub for any special equipment he may need for the case.

e. If the instruments were not wrapped and sterilized on the preceding shift, ensure that
instrument sets are placed in the autoclave.

f. Check that all equipment needed to position the patient is in the room. If not, get the necessary
equipment.

g. Discuss with the scrub the sterile supplies needed for the case (be sure to discuss the kind and
amount of sutures needed) and then bring the supplies into the room. The surgeon’s preference
card will list the types and sizes of sutures needed for the procedure.

h. Place sterile goods on the tables or stands where they will be used to avoid having to move
them from one place to another. You should place the various sterile items as indicated in (1)
through (6) below.

(1) The linen or drape pack on the large instrument table (backtable).

(2) The gown pack on the prep table.

(3) The Mayo tray on the Mayo stand.

(4) The sterile basin set into the ring stand.

(5) The prep set placed on the prep table. Only after the scrub dons the gown and the wrapper is
removed,

(6) The instrument set on a ring stand or table.

i. Put sterile packages that the scrub will not need immediately (such as suction tubing and
culture tubes) on the utility table and open them after the scrub has prepared a space for them.
You may also place on the utility tables supplies needed from the sterile supply cabinets such
as knife blades, needles, etc.

j. Do not place sterile supplies on the operating table nor on the anesthetist’s equipment (the
anesthesia apparatus and the anesthetist’s table) because these areas are for the use by the
anesthetist only.


                                                 lxxxii
k. Open the sterile supplies. Before any sterile supplies are opened, however, the integrity of
every package is checked for tears, punctures, watermarks, expiration date, and the sterilization
indicator. Tears, punctures, and watermarks on a sterile pack indicate that the supplies are unsafe
to use. The sterilization indicator shows whether the pack has been through the sterilization
process. The date of expiration will tell you whether it is too old for safe use. If the package is
in any way compromised, it must be discarded and a new pack secured.

l. Open the packs and sets in the order in which the scrub will need them. Open the sterile gown
first; the scrub will need this immediately upon entering the room.

(1) Remove the tape from the packages, unwrap the item, and check the indicator tape to ensure
item has been through the sterilization process. If the indicator tape shows no or incomplete
sterilization process, discard the package and secure a new one.

(2) After opening the pack containing the scrub’s gown, open the basin set, the linen pack, the
prep set ,and the instrument set.

m. All sterile wrappers are to be removed in the same general manner. Open the wrapper so that
your hand and arm do not pass over any part of the inside of the wrapper that has been expos
•    Documentation of Operation Theatre technical service
An operating theatre book is essential: it contains detailed records of the patients operated on
and the surgical procedures performed. This is useful information for planning and ordering
supplies. All information in the operating theatre book is considered to be confidential.

Information to be recorded in the operating theatre book Consecutive patient number (OT
number)
Patient name
Age/sex
Patient's admission number
Diagnosis
Aetiology
Surgical procedure done
Surgeon
Type of anaesthesia given
Anaesthetist

For ease of identification, each patient's first operation should be entered with a red pen and
subsequent operations in blue/black.

For accurate record-keeping there are two or three numbers recorded in the operation book for
each operation:

                                             lxxxiii
• the number that corresponds to the number of operations performed in the operation theatre
(the consecutive OT number)
• the patient's admission number, which corresponds to the number written on the individual
patient record

Recording the diagnosis/aetiology may only be necessary for the initial operation (see Fig. 39).

Other useful documents and checklists include:
• operation lists
• compress check for laparotomies
• weekly maintenance checks
• weekly oiling of instruments
• duty roster
• diary of ward rounds for compilation of operating lists
 The operating theatre book.




The first two patients are routine cases and their entries are written in black; note that in the
“diagnosis” column the diagnosis is replaced by their “OT” number which corresponds to the
operation number of their initial surgical intervention: this saves time.
Subsequent patients are new admissions (admitted during an influx of wounded); their entries
are written in red so that they can be easily identified as new cases.

Note that the triage numbers are also written in the patient number column. This is because very
often patients admitted during an influx are not allocated an admission number before being
transferred to the operating theatre, but it is nevertheless essential to be able to identify each
patient accurately.




SHORT RESPONSES FOR LEARNING OUTCOME 4

1.List useful documents and checklists include:
2. As the damp dusting is accomplished, set up list the item you will check for for proper
functioning

                                             lxxxiv
3. After cleaning, instruments and devices should be thoroughly rinsed explain the importance
of rinsing,
4.The CST in the first scrub role should keep the instruments free of debris and
blood during the surgical procedure. explain how this is done
SHORT RESPONSES ANSWERS FOR LEARNING OUTCOME 4
1.List useful documents and checklists include:
• operation lists
• compress check for laparotomies
• weekly maintenance checks
• weekly oiling of instruments
• duty roster
• diary of ward rounds for compilation of operating lists
 The operating theatre book.
2. As the damp dusting is accomplished, set up list the item you will check for for proper
functioning
(a) Switch on the overhead light to ensure proper functioning.

(b) Check the operating table for proper working order.

(c) Check the suction machine, the electrosurgical unit, and other pieces of equipment in the
operating room whether or not they are to be used.
3. After cleaning, instruments and devices should be thoroughly rinsed explain the importance
of rinsing,
Rinsing is extremely important, because residuals can reduce the efficacy of the disinfection and
sterilization processes and possibly cause damage to the tissues of the surgical patient.

(d) Line the kick buckets with plastic bags.

(e) Check the supply cabinets for stock. Restock, if necessary.
4.The CST in the first scrub role should keep the instruments free of debris and
blood during the surgical procedure.explain how this is done
A. The instruments should be wiped clean using a sterile, water-moistened
sponge. Care must be taken that the sponge is not used on the tissues of the patient.
B. Instruments with lumens should be flushed with a sterile, water-filled
syringe to remove blood and debris and prevent drying of the gross soil.
C. Instruments that may not be used for the remainder of procedure, eg,
acetabular reamers used during a total hip arthroplasty, may be placed into
a basin containing sterile water to soak.
D. Saline must not be used, since the chloride ions can cause pitting and



                                               lxxxv
       REFERENCES


1.more information ,please click here http://www.chinacaremedical.com/c/patient-
monitor_0375
2. Observational teamwork assessment for surgery (OTAS) S.Undre, A.Healey,
C.A.Vincent, A.Darzi poster presentation at BAUS Harrogate 2004
3. Simulation versus Reality: S. Undre: Invited presentation at the Scottish
Standing Committee meeting of the Association of Anaesthetists. Stirling,
Scotland, U.K Feb 2005
4. Multidisciplinary Crisis Simulations: The way forward for training surgical
teams. Undre S, Koutantji M, Sevdalis N, Selvapatt N, Williams S, Gautama
S, McCulloch P, Vincent C, Darzi A: Poster presentation at World Congress
of Endourology 2005, Amsterdam
314
5. Effects of training in team communication, briefing and checklisting during
multidisciplinary crisis simulation. Rao, K.; Gautama, S.; McCulloch, P.;
Koutantji, M.; Undre, S.; Thomas„ P.; Sevdalis, N.; Cunniffe, S.
Anaesthesia. 61(1):90-91, January 2006.
6. Observational teamwork assessment for surgery (OTAS) S.Undre, A.Healey,
C.A.Vincent, A.Darzi oral presentation European Association of Work and
Organisational Psychology. Istabul, Turkey May 2005
7. Teamwork in Surgery. S Undre, N Sevdalis. Oral presentation at the NPSA
safety seminar. July 2006, London
8. Sevdalis N, Undre S, Healey, AN, Vincent C, Darzi, A. Observational
Teamwork Assessment for Surgery: An Empirical. Review. International
Association for Applied Psychology, Athens, July 2006
Journal articles citing work from the thesis (OTAS 2004 QSHC paper)
1. Catchpole KR, Giddings AEB, De Leval MR, et al. Identification of systems
failures in successful paediatric cardiac surgery. Ergonomics 49 (5-6): 567-
588 Apr-May 2006
2. Sevdalis N, McCulloch P. Teaching evidence-based decision-making. Surg
Clin North Am 86 (1): 59 Feb 2006
3. Yule S, Ffin R, Paterson-Brown S, et al. Non-technical skills for surgeons in
the operating room: A review of the literature. Surg 139 (2): 140-149 Feb
2006
4. McCulloch P. Surgical professionalism in the 21st century. Lancet 367
(9505): 177-181 Jan 2006
5. Moorthy K, Munz Y, Adams S, et al. A human factors analysis of technical
and team skills among surgical trainees during procedural simulations in a

                                    lxxxvi
simulated operating theatre. Ann Surg 242 (5): 631-639 Nov 2005
6. Moorthy K, Vincent C, Darzi A. Simulation based training. BMJ 330 (7490):
493-494A Mar 2005




                                         lxxxvii
lxxxviii
                                      CHAPTER TWELVE

     EXECUTE PERIOPERATIVE THEATRE ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES
UNIT CODE: HE/OS/TT/CR/05/6
UNIT DESCRIPTION
This unit standard specifies the competencies required to execute perioperative theatre
administrative services. It involves execution/implementation of perioperative theatre policies
and performing administrative duties. It also entails the day to day running of perioperative
theatre facility.
It applies to Health industry.

    2. Administration
    Introduction
    Administration is defined as the act of managing duties, responsibilities, or rules. It can also
    be defined as the act of administering; government, public affairs; the service rendered, or
    duties assumed, in conducting affairs; the conducting of any office or employment; direction.
    Types of administrations
    d) Authoritative Administration: Authoritative administration refers to
        a management style where the leader is in complete control. An authoritative leader is
        one who sets the goals, determines the processes and oversees all steps it takes to reach
        those goals with little or no input from team members
    e) Democratic Administration: Also known as participative administration or
        shared leadership, is a type of administrative style in which members of the group take
        a more participative role in the decision-making process
    f) Laissez-faire administration: also known as de- legative leadership, is a type of leadership
        style in which leaders are hands-off and allow group members to make the decisions.
6.1 Administrative duties and roles
The role of an administrator is vital in any company and varies from organization to
organization. However, the necessary skills or responsibilities are all the same in different
organizations. One of the most common and significant duties of an administrator is to look after
the business operations. For this, an administrator needs to have a good set of skills so that
he/she can manage a team of people who can handle any situation within the organization.
Excellent communication is one of the most important key ingredients for an administrator
Important skills of an administrator
                                               lxxxix
           A great team player

           A desire to take an initiative

           Ability to withstand pressure cooker situations

           Organization Skills and a systematic approach to work

           Good at juggling tasks and prioritizing

           Attention to minute details


3.     Roles of an Administrator


Planning and Organizing

Planning is the most vital task of an administrator. It is a responsibility for him/her to plan long-
term objectives that can help the organization to reach its ultimate goal. Moreover, to execute
these plans and get success is again a big responsibility. The professionals in the
admin department in any company need to analyze that how, when, where, and with whom the
plan should be made and executed accordingly.


Organizing is again equally important, which lets the administrator coordinate the efforts of a
business to reach heights of success.


Directing

So, after planning and organizing are done, the administrator begins direction, which is to be
followed by all in the company. Leading the employees within the company to attain the main
objective of the organization needs the amalgamation of resources and an effective support
system. An interpersonal skill, which is the most commonly found talent among the
administrators, is essential as he/she needs to interact and deal with people with different
personalities. Moreover, an efficient administrator will use the potential of the workforce to
make the plan work as a set. It includes the entrustment of authority, accountability, and control
to other administrative teams.



                                                  xc
Staffing

Staffing is another important role of an administrator. For this, complete knowledge about the
company and to understand what it requires is very necessary. The administrator must interact
and coordinate with other departments of the organization, including the human resource
department. Not only the HR department but the admin department, too, actively take part in the
recruitment and screening process. After the hiring process is done, the admin team should
keenly appraise the progress of the new member of the company.


Liaison

An efficient administrator is a liaison between employees and management. The admin team
understands the need for the employees as well as the management and hence plans things
accordingly to meet their demands. It helps to maintain a balance in the organization and also to
keep a positive environment free from conflicts. It is the sole responsibility of an administrator to
take care of the expectations and performances of each individual.


The administration department is the backbone of the company. A skilled and efficient
administrator is an asset to the organization. He/she is a link between the employees and the
management of the company. Without an excellent team of an admin department, an
organization cannot run smoothly.




                                                 xci
    Figure 1




6.2 Policies and Standard Operating Procedures.
Policies and standard operating procedures are the foundations of an organization. Even if
they’re not written down, policies and procedures define your organization and ensure that things
are running smoothly. For best results, however, both policies and procedures should be written
down and codified to avoid misunderstandings or inefficiencies. There are lots of “policy and
                                               xcii
procedure” software’s out there that helps organizations to put those rules and processes down
and share them with employees; in practice.


4.       Defining Policies



Policies are principles or beliefs within an organization that set direction, guide and influence
decision-making. Policies guide the day-to-day actions and strategies, but allow for flexibility –
the big keyword for policies is “guiding”. They establish a framework of management
philosophies, aims and objectives. Policy can be driven by business philosophy, competition,
marketplace pressure, law or regulation and in many cases all of these.

Organizational policies tend to have topics such as social media use, sick time and paid leave,
acceptable work behavior and codes of conduct, employee onboarding and termination,
workplace discrimination and proper certifications and licensing among a plethora of other
topics, some specific to your business.

5.       Defining standard operating Procedures

SOPs have a narrow focus; they describe, step by step, what actions to take in specific instances.
Procedures have a beginning and an end and should be strictly followed to achieve the desired
outcome. The cyclical nature and uniformity of a procedure are vitally important for training new
employees, compliance, and process improvement and auditing.

Examples of procedural topics include emergency procedures in theatre, material ordering,
equipment operation or how to inventory supplies and goods

6.       Some Key Differences between policies and SOPs

When it comes to creating, updating and implementing your policies and procedures, there are
some key differences.
Policies:

        Change infrequently
        State who, what when or why
                                                xciii
        Are broad and general

Procedures (SOPs)

        Continuously change and improve
        State what, how, when or who
        Offer a detailed description of activities

7.       Why are company or organizational policies important?
Company policies put in writing what you expect from your employees. These may be related to
performance, values or behavior. Additionally, company policies can serve as pre-warnings for
employees, since they outline the consequences of failing to abide by the rules.


Company policies are important for a variety of other reasons, including:


        Setting expectations
        Keeping management accountable
        Ensuring compliance with the law
        Helping defend against legal claims
        Assisting with fair treatment of employees

8.       List of organization policies to consider creating
Here are some of the policies that your company should consider putting in place:


1. Equal opportunity policy
Many countries mandate that you must be an equal opportunity employer by law. For example,
in the United States, the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission enforces a wide
range of federal laws that prohibit workplace discrimination.


An equal opportunity policy (EOP) prevents companies from discriminating against job
applicants or employees if they are a member of a protected class (e.g., race, gender, age,
religion, familial status, color). The EOP is essential for any anti-harassment, workplace
violence, non-discrimination or diversity policies your company may consider developing.

                                                  xciv
2. Workplace health and safety
It’s important to provide your employees with a safe and healthy work environment, especially
since workplace health and safety violations can cause harm to your employees, cost your
business money and damage your reputation.


Your business should be proactive and write a health and safety policy that is designed for each
workplace. For example, you might specify what employees should do in case of office
emergencies or how to handle unsafe materials. The Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA) has guidelines on how to create a safe workplace and protect workers
from occupational hazards that you can base your policy on.


3. Employee code of conduct policy
A clear and concise code of conduct can help employees understand your r expectations in terms
of performance and behavior. This policy might include specific rules related to substance abuse,
sexual harassment, giving gifts, dress code, confidentiality, and even the use of cell
phones or social media during work hours.
4. Attendance, vacation and time-off policies
Having a standard way to request a day off or take vacation leave will help things run more
smoothly in the office. The policy should outline how much time off employees receive, when
and how they can accrue more time off, who they should contact to request their time off and
anything else they may need to know .You can also choose to create a separate attendance
policy that outlines what is considered tardy, how far in advance they should request time off and
what happens if they don’t show up for work.


Here’s an example of a company attendance policy you can use to help write your own:


Employees are expected to be on time and regular in attendance. This means being at your
workspace and ready to work at your scheduled time each day. You will be given a 10-minute
grace period after the start of your shift before you will be considered tardy. Employees who are
tardy on more than five occasions will be subject to disciplinary action. Absenteeism and
tardiness are burdensome to your co-workers and leaders, and will not be tolerated without just



                                                xcv
cause.


4. Employee disciplinary action policy
Some of the most important company policies involve discipline and employee conduct. Before
you can hold your employees accountable for their actions, it’s important to record your
expectations in terms of performance and behavior in your employee handbook or individual
employee contracts. With complete access to the rules and regulations of the workplace, you can
then enforce disciplinary action when appropriate while using the employee handbook as a point
of reference.
A simple step-by-step list of what happens regarding disciplinary action can make it easy for
employees to know what to expect if they violate a company policy. Describe a specific process
you will follow to ensure every employee is treated fairly when it comes to discipline. Have a
lawyer review this information before you include it in your employee handbook to make sure all
disciplinary action is legal.


6. Employee complaint policies
Grievances are formal complaints your employees can file to document their concerns with an
aspect of their workplace. These grievances might be filed as a result of an incident or conflict
with a fellow employee. A grievance can be filed for nearly any reason, including physical
workplace complaints, financial issues like payroll and social circumstances like harassment or
bullying. It’s important to outline a formal process for resolving complaints within your
company so that employees know how to handle their concerns in a professional way.


It may also be a good idea to develop a non-retaliation policy to protect employees who make
good faith complaints against their manager or co-workers.


9.       How to develop company policies as an employer
If you want to develop business policies to address important workplace issues, consider
following the steps below:




                                                xcvi
1. Identify the need for the policy
Observe the way your management and employees deal with workplace issues, and identify
which areas could use improvement. For instance, if employees consistently violate unwritten
rules, you may consider adding a new policy that addresses this and other related issues.
2. Determine the content needed for the policy
Write down key areas that need to be addressed within the policy. For instance, you can include
different sections or clauses that prevent you or your employees from finding loopholes.
Consider all aspects of the policy, what you would like your employees to do and what you
would like them to avoid doing. It’s also a good idea to include what form of disciplinary action
will be taken if a policy is violated.
3. Communicate the new policy to employees
Current employees need to be notified of new policies when they’re released or added to the
employee handbook. You may even consider adding a signature line to the new policy to make
sure employees know that they must follow the rule from the date they sign it. This prevents
conflict later on if an employee states they were never aware of the policy after receiving
disciplinary action for violating it.


It’s also important to review and discuss company policies with new employees during
onboarding so they know what to expect. Consider having them sign a form stating that they
were given an employee handbook or a list of your policies, rules and regulations.


4. Update and revise the policy as necessary
You may consider amending or revising your policies as necessary in accordance with laws and
regulations or according to your company’s objectives and any employee feedback.


Why Are Standard Operating Procedures Important?
The important task of writing policies and procedures rarely gets the respect it deserves. Most
people recognize the need for having standard policies, but standard operating procedures often
get viewed as a necessary evil. Why is that?
 Good procedures and work instructions provide a way to communicate and apply consistent
standards and practices within your organization.
GOOD procedures . . .

                                               xcvii
      save time and mistakes
      reduce training costs
      ensure consistent results
      empower the workforce
      get read and used
      support quality goals
      enable you to delegate work

But, BAD procedures, can be as disastrous as no procedures at all!
Bad procedures . . .
      cause errors and frustration
      increase training costs
      waste time and money
      detract from quality goals
      don’t get read or used

7. Supervisory services
   Definition
   Supervision is a professional and collaborative activity between a supervisor and a worker in
   which the supervisor provides guidance and support to the worker to promote competent and
   ethical delivery of services and supports through the continuing development of the worker's
   application of accepted professional peer work knowledge, skills, and values.
   Benefits of supervision in an organization
          Supervision is a tool that can be used to achieve the agency’s mission and objectives
          Supervision improves performance and helps to manage resources
          The supervisor serves as the mediator and liaison between the agency and the worker
          Good supervision can increase morale and improve retention
Functions of a supervisor
a) Administrative
Administrative supervision tasks focus on the effective implementation of the agency’s policies
and procedures and the management of the peer worker’s work performance.
• Quality of work
• Work load
                                              xcviii
• Liaison to operations - payroll, human resources
• Using program resources, including time, effectively
• Conformance or fidelity to the program model
• Record keeping
b) Educative
Educative supervision tasks focus on the professional development of the worker through
training, modeling and structuring learning experiences.
• Provide time and space to reflect on peer practice
• Focus on knowledge, skills and attitudes
• Provide individualized training and support
• Provide venue for supporting the peer worker’s professional development
c) Supportive
Supportive supervision tasks focus on the person’s morale and job satisfaction.
• Give feedback on work
• Discuss personal reactions to the work
• Validate and provide encouragement
• Promote self- care practices
• Advocate for peer support roles
Supervision formats
a) Individual supervision
Advantages
• Exclusive attention to the worker
• Often experienced as safer by the worker
• More confidential
Disadvantages
• Dependence can develop
• Exposure to only one perspective in supervision
• Lost opportunity to learn from colleagues
b) Group supervision
Advantages
• More efficient than individual supervision
• Supervisees share information and may learn from each other

                                                xcix
• Can be a powerful way to reduce isolation and may foster group cohesiveness
Disadvantages
• Working in a group can be experienced as unsafe by some workers
• It may difficult to meet the specific needs of individual participants and there is a risk
discussions remain generalized and do not meet anyone’s needs in a satisfactory way
c) Co-supervision
Co - supervision is the provision of supervision by more than one supervisor • This model may
be used when the organization does not have supervisors who are peer support workers • Peer
workers may benefits from a second supervisor if their primary supervisor doesn’t have the
expertise to help them develop in their peer practice • Often, one supervisor provides more
administrative supervision and the other provides more education. Ideally, both provide support.
Advantages
• Workers benefit from the guidance of more than one person
• Workers can develop their competencies with a skills peer support worker
Disadvantages
     Some agencies don’t have the resources to offer co – supervision
     There may be challenges in communication or disagreements between the co-supervisors
     Co - supervisors may not share the same expectations
Many organizations offer multiple formats of supervision to address different professional
development needs and different workers get different learning needs addressed by different
formats.
7.1 Human resource management :
      Human resource management is the process of employing people, training them,
      compensating them, developing policies relating to the workplace, and developing strategies
      to retain employees
Roles of HRM


10.      Staffing


You need people to perform tasks and get work done in the organization. Even with the most
sophisticated machines, humans are still needed. Because of this, one of the major tasks in HRM



                                                  c
    is staffing. Staffing involves the entire hiring process from posting a job to negotiating a salary
    package. Within the staffing function, there are four main steps:
5. Development of a staffing plan. This plan allows HRM to see how many people they should
    hire based on revenue expectations.

6. Development of policies to encourage multiculturalism at work. Multiculturalism in the
    workplace is becoming more and more important, as we have many more people from a variety
    of backgrounds in the workforce.

7. Recruitment. This involves finding people to fill the open positions.

8. Selection. In this stage, people will be interviewed and selected, and a proper compensation
    package will be negotiated. This step is followed by training, retention, and motivation.


    11.    Development of Workplace Policies


    Every organization has policies to ensure fairness and continuity within the organization. One of
    the jobs of HRM is to develop the verbiage surrounding these policies. In the development of
    policies, HRM, management, and executives are involved in the process. For example, the HRM
    professional will likely recognize the need for a policy or a change of policy, seek opinions on
    the policy, write the policy, and then communicate that policy to employees. It is key to note
    here that HR departments do not and cannot work alone. Everything they do needs to involve all
    other departments in the organization. Some examples of workplace policies might be the
    following:
   Discipline process policy

   Vacation time policy

   Dress code

   Ethics policy

   Internet usage policy


    12.    Compensation and Benefits Administration


    HRM professionals need to determine that compensation is fair, meets industry standards, and is
    high enough to entice people to work for the organization. Compensation includes anything the
                                                      ci
    employee receives for his or her work. In addition, HRM professionals need to make sure the pay
    is comparable to what other people performing similar jobs are being paid. This involves setting
    up pay systems that take into consideration the number of years with the organization, years of
    experience, education, and similar aspects. Examples of employee compensation include the
    following:
   Pay

   Health benefits

   retirement plans or packages

   Stock purchase plans

   Vacation time

   Sick leave

   Bonuses

   Tuition reimbursement


    13.    Retention


    Retention involves keeping and motivating employees to stay with the organization.
    Compensation is a major factor in employee retention, but there are other factors as well. Ninety
    percent of employees leave a company for the following reasons:
5. Issues around the job they are performing

6. Challenges with their manager

7. Poor fit with organizational culture

8. Poor workplace environment


    Despite this, 90 percent of managers think employees leave as a result of pay (Rivenbark, 2010).
    As a result, managers often try to change their compensation packages to keep people from
    leaving, when compensation isn’t the reason they are leaving at all.




                                                    cii
    14.    Training and Development


    Once we have spent the time to hire new employees, we want to make sure they not only are
    trained to do the job but also continue to grow and develop new skills in their job. This results in
    higher productivity for the organization. Training is also a key component in employee
    motivation. Employees who feel they are developing their skills tend to be happier in their jobs,
    which results in increased employee retention. Examples of training programs might include the
    following:
   Job skills training, such as how to run a particular computer program

   Training on communication

   Team-building activities

   Policy and legal training, such as sexual harassment training and ethics training


    15.    Dealing with Laws Affecting Employment


    Human resource people must be aware of all the laws that affect the workplace. An HRM
    professional might work with some of these laws:
   Discrimination laws

   Health-care requirements

   Compensation requirements such as the minimum wage

   Worker safety laws

   Labor laws


    The legal environment of HRM is always changing, so HRM must always be aware of changes
    taking place and then communicate those changes to the entire management organization. Rather
    than presenting a chapter focused on HRM laws, we will address these laws in each relevant
    chapter.




                                                     ciii
    16.    Worker Protection


    Safety is a major consideration in all organizations. Oftentimes new laws are created with the
    goal of setting federal or state standards to ensure worker safety. Unions and union contracts can
    also impact the requirements for worker safety in a workplace. It is up to the human resource
    manager to be aware of worker protection requirements and ensure the workplace is meeting
    both federal and union standards. Worker protection issues might include the following:
   Chemical hazards

   Heating and ventilation requirements

   Use of “no fragrance” zones

   Protection of private employee information


    17.    Communication

    Besides these major roles, good communication skills and excellent management skills are key to
    successful human resource management as well as general management.




    Figure 2: summary of HRM roles




                                                    civ
   18.     Awareness of External Factors


   In addition to managing internal factors, the HR manager needs to consider the outside forces at
   play that may affect the organization. Outside forces, or external factors, are those things the
   company has no direct control over; however, they may be things that could positively or
   negatively impact human resources. External factors might include the following:
11. Globalization and offshoring

12. Changes to employment law

13. Health-care costs

14. Employee expectations

                                                    cv
15. Diversity of the workforce

16. Changing demographics of the workforce

17. A more highly educated workforce

18. Layoffs and downsizing

19. Technology used, such as HR databases

20. Increased use of social networking to distribute information to employees


   For example, the recent trend in flexible work schedules (allowing employees to set their own
   schedules) and telecommuting (allowing employees to work from home or a remote location for
   a specified period of time, such as one day per week) are external factors that have affected HR.
   HRM has to be aware of these outside issues, so they can develop policies that meet not only the
   needs of the company but also the needs of the individuals. Another example is the Patient
   Protection and Affordable Care Act, signed into law in 2010. Compliance with this bill has huge
   implications for HR. For example, a company with more than fifty employees must provide
   health-care coverage or pay a penalty. Currently, it is estimated that 60 percent of employers
   offer health-care insurance to their employees (Cappelli, 2010). Because health-care insurance
   will be mandatory, cost concerns as well as using health benefits as a recruitment strategy are big
   external challenges. Any manager operating without considering outside forces will likely
   alienate employees, resulting in unmotivated, unhappy workers. Not understanding the external
   factors can also mean breaking the law, which has a concerning set of implications as well.




                                     Figure 3; Key external factors




                                                   cvi
 An understanding of key external factors is important to the successful HR professional. This
  allows him or her to be able to make strategic decisions based on changes in the external
                                        environment.



7.2 Resource utilization



                                              cvii
    Resource utilization refers to the metric that indicates whether your whole team, or individual
    employees, are fully booked. It describes the process of planning a project and ensuring the
    available resources in the company are being used to their highest potential. It helps project
    managers identify which of their employees are being over utilized so they can allocate
    responsibilities to someone else if needed, and can also assist in identifying the people who are
    underutilized, so they can assign new projects to them.
    Resource Allocation vs. Resource Utilization
    While the purpose of both processes may seem similar, there are some key distinctions to be
    drawn between the two:

         Resource allocation refers to a project manager selecting suitable employees for a project,
          and then managing them as they complete the project, reassigning or altering workloads if
          necessary.
         Resource utilization is the process of strategically measuring how effective resources are.
          Allocation organizes a project, but it is utilization that makes it successful.



    19.      Benefits of resource utilization



   Proper utilization of resources is important for maintaining productivity, because it prevents staff
    from underperforming or being overburdened by workloads and burning out.

   Projects can be managed with better visibility, reducing the risk of oversights

   Maximum utilization of resources gives you a better ROI (Return on investment)
   It ensures that specific resources aren’t being over or under-utilized

   It allows property management systems to be agile and reschedule resources as quickly as
    possible to avoid problems surfacing or becoming worse

    Tips for Implementing Resource Utilization
    When a company has a robust resource management platform, project managers have access to
    the tools needed to approach and master effective resource utilization. Some key tips to keep in
    mind include:


                                                       cviii
   Leverage Visibility – especially for larger companies, several projects may be running at the
    same time, and while they exist separately they still affect one another down the line. Rather
    than looking at projects as separate entities, formulate a resource utilization plan that can
    provide insight into project-specific metrics, as well as an overview of all resources in the
    company. This way, you will be able to assess overall work capacity
    and resource performance on a bigger picture scale, helping identify any company-wide
    areas of improvement.
   Beware of Scope Creep – projects are shape shifting by nature, so some will inevitably
    demand additional time and resources. It is the responsibility of the project manager to
    ensure projects don’t go over allotted time or budget. A resource utilization strategy can help
    centralize all active projects, leveraging resources equally amongst them to help keep things
    within their optimal scope.
   Always Be Prepared – as a project manager, you need to be prepared for any and
    all scenarios. During your planning process, visualize and run through various situations that
    could arise, and prepare for a change of circumstances as if it were inevitable. This way, if
    the budget changes, or a resource is lost, your team will be able to adapt more quickly.




7.3 Service delivery
Service delivery can be defined as any contact with the public administration during which
customers – citizens, residents or enterprises – seek or provide data, handle their affairs or fulfil
their duties. These services should be delivered in an effective, predictable, reliable and
customer-friendly manner.
The four key elements for successful service delivery system are
                                                  cix
5. Service Culture is built on elements of leadership principles, norms, work habits and vision,
      mission and values. Culture is the set of overriding principles according to which management
      controls, maintains and develops the social process that manifests itself as delivery of service and
      gives value to customers. Once a superior service delivery system and a realistic service concept
      have been established, there is no other component as fundamental to the long-term success of a
      service organization as its culture.
6. Employee Engagement includes employee attitude activities, purpose driven leadership and HR
      processes. Even the best designed processes and systems will only be effective if carried out by
      people with higher engagement. Engagement is the moderator between the design and the
      execution of the service excellence model.
7. Service Quality includes strategies, processes and performance management systems. The
      strategy and process design is fundamental to the design of the overall service management
      model. Helping the client fulfil their mission and supporting them in the pursuit of their
      organizational purpose, must be the foundation of any service provider partnership.
8. Customer Experience includes elements of customer intelligence, account management and
      continuous improvements. Perception is king and constantly evaluating how both customer and
      end-user perceive service delivery is important for continuous collaboration. Successful service
      delivery works on the basis that the customer is a part of the creation and delivery of the service
      and then designs processes built on that philosophy – this is called co-creation




      7.4 Motivation of employees
      Definition: Employee motivation is defined as the enthusiasm, energy level, commitment and
      the amount of creativity that an employee brings to the organization on a daily basis.
      Employee motivation is all about how engaged an employee feels in tandem to the organization’s
      goals and how empowered he/she feels. Motivation is of two types:


       Intrinsic motivation
       Extrinsic motivation
      Motivated employees are an asset to an organization, they are directly proportional to an
      organization’s success. Motivation is intangible, difficult to measure and extremely difficult to
                                                       cx
 control, but very easy to facilitate if done right. It’s all about intention, intensity, and
 perseverance


 Intrinsic motivation
 Intrinsic motivation means that an individual is motivated from within. He/she has the desire to
 perform well at the workplace because the results are in accordance with his/her belief system.


 An individual’s deep-rooted beliefs are usually the strongest motivational factors. Such
 individuals show common qualities like acceptance, curiosity, honor, and desire to achieve
 success.


 Extrinsic motivation
 Extrinsic motivation means an individual’s motivation is stimulated by external factors- rewards
 and recognition. Some people may never be motivated internally and only external motivation
 would work with them to get the tasks done.




 Ways of motivating employees
11. Employee motivation surveys: Use an online survey software or platform to conduct
   employee motivation surveys. Let them give candid and genuine feedback about their
   experience, ideas, and suggestions. This will help you identify areas that need your attention.
12. Employee satisfaction surveys: Employee satisfaction depends on a ton of factors such as
   work environment, infrastructure, roles and responsibilities, etc. Conducting employee
   satisfaction surveys will help Managers understand dissatisfaction factors and act on them.
   Frequent surveys will help addressing dissatisfaction issues faster.
13. Job well done- recognize it! Recognition plays a huge role in increasing the motivation levels
   of the employees. It helps create a healthy bond between the employer and employees. It not
   only fulfills our basic need of esteem but also facilitates belonging.
14. Focus on intrinsic rewards: It is true some people need rewards to get tasks done, but
   extrinsic rewards fade very quickly. Focus on motivating your employees from within. Some
                                                    cxi
   may even say, “yeah this is all good but we got to eat and pay rent”… well, that’s true, for that
   you compensate your employees well, but make sure you create values for your organization
   that are long-lasting.
15. Autonomy not bureaucracy: Micromanagement is the worst thing you can do as a manager.
   It is not only time consuming, but also really unwanted. If you have hired people with certain
   skillset let them do their job, be a facilitator, not a dictator. Human beings value autonomy,
   give them the freedom to get things done in ways acceptable and see the changes.
16. Create an amazing work environment: According to a study conducted by Ohio State
   University, your work environment seriously impacts your mood. So it does make sense to
   invest in the work environment where people actually spend 60 hours a week. Creating a good
   atmosphere will motivate your staff. Just go ahead and do it.
17. Be a visionary: Lead with vision. Employees need to know their efforts are driving something
   important. They need to know their destination and more importantly the path that will take
   them there. If as a leader you lack the vision for your own organization, how do you expect
   them to own up to your vision? Make a visual reminder of your organization’s road map,
   encourage your employees to add to that. You will be surprised how innovative they can get.
18. Solicit ideas and suggestions, act on them: Now that you have conducted surveys, you have
   received feedback from your employees. Ensure that the ideas, suggestions, grievances that
   they have put forth will looked into and addressed in a timely fashion.
19. Career-pathing: Having a career growth plan with clearly mentioned roles and
   responsibilities is crucial to employees. It helps them focus, and direct their efforts to an
   achievable goal. Make sure that you sit down with every employee and come up with a career
   plan that is transparent and communicated clearly.
20. Provide flexibility: Not all employees are alike. Some prefer coming to work daily, others not
   much. For some, commuting to work might be long and challenging. Allow some flexibility
   within reason and your employees will be happy and motivated
   Importance of employee motivation
 According to psychologists, self-realization is a very human thing. It is our basic nature to
 nurture something and see it flourish, it is applicable to most things we do in our day-to-day life.
 This is true for both social and societal spaces.




                                                     cxii
    Motivation plays a very important factor in a human’s life. Whether it is about improving
    ourselves or our organization’s performance. Motivated employees don’t need to be told how to
    get things done, they take initiatives, are eager to take up additional responsibilities, are
    innovative and go-getters.
    Motivated employees ensure:


     There is a positive atmosphere within the organization
     Co-workers are happy and feel safe at work
     Make sure clients are happy
     They always achieve better results than their counterparts
    Motivation, therefore, plays a very important factor and ensures employees remain active and
    contribute their best towards their organization. Furthermore, a high level of motivation leads to
    a lower level of employee turnover


    Herzberg’s motivation theory
    Herzberg’s motivation theory or two-factor theory says there are two factors to which an
    organization can adjust to influence the levels of motivation at the workplace.


    The two factors identified by Herzberg are:


    1. Motivating factors: The presence of motivating factors encourages employees to work harder.
    They are the factors found in the workplace.


    2. Hygiene factors: Hygiene factor if not present will discourage employees from doing their best
    at work. Hygiene factors are the surrounding factors that facilitate employee’s behavior.
    Here are some of the examples of motivators and hygiene factor


                              Motivators                                                     Hygiene Factors

                              Recognition                                                           Security

                                 Growth                                                     Company policies



                                                     cxiii
                        Achievements                                                         Salary

                        The work itself                                               Work conditions

                        Responsibility                                               Manager/supervisor

There are 4 statistics that are involved here:


1. High hygiene & high motivation


This is an ideal situation any manager or supervisor would want to achieve. Here all the
employees are happily motivated and have very few grievances.


2. High hygiene & low motivation


In this situation, employees have very few grievances but are also not highly motivated. A very
good example of this situation is employees are paid well but the work is not very interesting.
Employees simply collect their pay cheques and leave.


3. Low hygiene and high motivation


This is a tricky one, here employees are highly motivated but also have numerous grievances. A
typical example of a situation like this is when the work is extremely interesting but the
employees are not paid as per the market standard.


4. Low hygiene & low motivation


No points for guessing, it is obviously a pretty bad situation. Here neither the employees are
motivated nor are the hygiene factors are in place.


How to apply Herzberg’s motivation theory in practice
1. First and foremost rectify and change bureaucratic company policies. Make sure your Human
Resources is in line with what other organizations are offering and they know what the



                                                 cxiv
leadership’s expectations are. Keeping both in mind draft policies that is a win-win with
everyone.


2. Ensure your managers are also mentors and not just bosses. Each employee should be
respected and supported.


3. Organizational culture plays a very crucial role here. No cliches here.


4. Make sure the compensation, perks, and bonuses are as per the market standards. If you don’t
compensate your employees well, why would they show interest in taking any initiatives?


5. To increase job satisfaction make sure the jobs are constructed well and employees find their
jobs meaningful.


6. Delegate your employees’ responsibilities, make them feel valued. Respect their individuality,
listen to their feedback seriously and take action wherever necessary.


3. Implementation of policies at work place
Policy implementation is generally defined as a series of activities undertaken by government
or organizations to achieve the goals and objectives articulated in policy statements
Policy implementation process
To implement effective policies and procedures at your workplace, follow these steps to get the
best results.
20.     Step 1: Consultation

When developing your policies and procedures, you must consult with all relevant stakeholders,
including health and safety representatives, contractors (particularly those who work with you
regularly), and of course your employees.

Consultation should ensure that every person in your workplace understands the importance of
company policies and procedures and why they need to be implemented effectively.

It will also ensure that the policies and procedures are realistic and actionable on a daily basis.


                                                 cxv
Tip: Consultation helps to achieve more effective policies and procedures, and is a greater
motivation for employees to follow them.

21.    Step 2: Tailor the policy to your business

The policies and procedures you adopt need to be tailored to the needs of your business, not just
lifted straight from a generic manual.

If you use policies and procedures from another source, it is essential that you adapt them to your
company and your workplace operations.

22.    Step 3: Define obligations clearly – be specific!

All policies should be short and succinct.

All procedural steps should be set out in clear and plain English.

This will create an ‘auditable standard’, meaning that you create a standard that can be used to
measure whether your workplace health and safety obligations are being met or not.

The obligations outlined in an auditable standard should be defined in enough detail that persons
in your workplace understand exactly what is expected of them.

Specifically state what actions should be taken. For example, don’t say “dispose of chemicals
safely“, but state how this should be done at the site, e.g. “chemicals must be disposed of in the
designated approved dangerous goods waste drum“.

23.    Step 4: Make the policy realistic

Make sure your business has the time, resources and personnel to implement the policy.

There is no point in adopting a policy which aspires to the best practice possible if your business
cannot realistically adopt the procedures set out.




                                                cxvi
This is the development stage of the policy and procedure done. Once you have completed these
steps, you will have the policies and procedures your company needs to maintain a healthy and
safe workplace.

But the next stage is just as important as the development stage, the implementation stage…

Don’t get too excited that you have developed the policies and procedures because without
implementing them correctly, they won’t be of any use to you.

24.    Step 5: Publicize the policies and procedures

Put your policies and procedures in writing and make them available to your entire workforce.

If possible, keep all your policies and procedures in a single manual, and make copies readily
available to all employees.

Tip: Safety documents should also be published on the company’s intranet if you have one.

25.    Step 6: Train all employees in policies and procedures

You have an obligation to provide adequate information, instruction, supervision and training to
your employees.

Ensure that new employees and contractors are trained and familiar with company policies and
procedures, and that existing staff receive appropriate training, e.g. annual refresher courses.

Policies and procedures should also be reiterated and discussed with staff regularly at team
meetings to ensure that employees remain aware of the importance & advantages of the policies
and procedures.

Tip: It is a good idea to have all employees and contractors sign off after they have read,
understood and agree to comply with your workplace policies. You should also keep records of
training and induction. Make sure that you record attendees and details of training content in
case an employee fails to sign a training record.




                                                cxvii
26.       Step 7: Be consistent in your policy implementation

Supervision of your workplace to ensure that the policies and procedures are being properly
implemented by all employees is essential.

Follow-up to ensure that any failure to follow the policy or procedure is addressed.

Specify that full compliance with the stated requirements is needed to ensure a safe workplace.

After this, any deliberate breaches of policies or procedures must be treated seriously, and dealt
with immediately and consistently.

All supervisors and managers must ‘lead by example’ in implementing policies and procedures.

If managers condone practices which do not fall within the policy, it could be argued that
disciplinary action against an employee who fails to follow the policy is unfair. The consequence
of any deliberate breach should be appropriate to the severity of the breach, whether it be:

         counselling;
         disciplinary action (e.g. a warning); or
         In serious circumstances, dismissal.

27.       Step 8: Review all policies and procedures regularly

Policies and procedures must be reviewed periodically.

When any changes occur, ensure your policies and procedures remain relevant and effective. For
example, a change may occur when a business purchases a new piece of machinery, starts using
a new chemical or adopts a new production method. Any such changes mean that relevant
procedures should be reviewed.

Tip: The review cycle will depend on the circumstances and document type, but it is a good idea
to review policies at least every 2 years

Implement a document management system that:


                                                     cxviii
             triggers reviews;
             notes the dates of change; and
             Involves interactive revision.

    All employees and contractors need to be made aware of the changes to policy and procedure
    when they occur.

    28.       Step 9: Enforce the workplace policies and procedures

    Once your policies and procedures have been implemented, they need to be enforced. Make sure
    that you approach this consistently as this is an important factor in being able to discipline a
    worker for a breach of policy.

    Problems of Policy Implementation
    29.       Equality, Equity and Policy: Problems of Policy Implementation
    Theoretical framework

    Implementation is the process of turning policy into practice. However, it is common to observe
    a ‘gap’ between what was planned and what actually occurs as a result of policy implementation.
    There are three major theoretical models of policy implementation (Buse et al, 2005).

    Top-down approach: This approach sees policy formation and policy execution as distinct
    activities. Policies are set at higher levels in a political process and are then communicated to
    subordinate levels which are charged with the technical, managerial, and administrative tasks of
    putting policy into practice. Political scientists have theorized that the top-down approach
    requires that certain conditions be in place for policy implementation to be effective including:

     Clear and logically consistent objectives
     Adequate causal theory (to how particular actions would lead to desired outcomes)
      An implementation process designed to enhance compliance by implementers (using
      incentives and sanctions)
     Committed, skillful implementing officials
     Support from interest groups and legislature
     No changes in socio-economic conditions that undermine political support or the causal theory
      underlying the policy

                                                     cxix
     Adequate time and sufficient resources available
     Good coordination and communication




    Problems associated with the top down approach:

     It is very unlikely that all pre-conditions would be present at the same time
     Only adopts perspective of those in higher levels of government and neglects the role of other
      actors
     Risks over-estimating the impact of government action (neglects other factors)
     Difficult to apply where no single, dominant policy or agency is involved
     Policies change as they are being implemented
    Bottom-up approach: This approach recognizes that individuals at subordinate levels are likely
    to play an active part in implementation and may have some discretion to reshape objectives of
    the policy and change the way it is implemented. The bottom-up approach sees policy
    implementation is an interactive process involving policy makers, implementers from various
    levels of government, and ‘street level bureaucrats’ such as frontline staff. Policy may change
    during implementation.
    Problems of the bottom-up approach:

     Evaluating the effects of a policy becomes difficult
     Difficult to separate the influence of individuals and different levels of government on policy
      decisions and consequences. (Important for bureaucratic accountability)
    Principal-agent theory: In each situation there will be a relationship between principals (those
    who define policy) and agents (those who implement policy), which may include contracts or
    agreements that enable the principal to specify what is provided and check that this has been
    accomplished. The amount of discretion given to the agents and the complexity of the principal-
    agent relationship are affected by:

     The nature of the policy problem- including scale of change required, size of affected group,
      simple vs. complex intervention, ill-defined vs. clear policy, many cause vs. single cause,
      degree of political sensitivity, length of time before changes become apparent.


                                                    cxx
     The context or circumstances surrounding the problem- political and economic climate,
      technological change
     The organization of the machinery required to implement the policy- number of formal and
      informal agencies, amount of skills and resources required.
    In practice

    Interpretation of policy directives requires the translation of knowledge on interventions into the
    particular local context. Factors to take into account when interpreting health policy include
    (Jenkin et al 2013):
     Local resources, including human resources and infrastructure
     Specific characteristics of the population
     Baseline incidence of the health problem
     The latency period before an effect of the intervention will be observed
     Local variations in the likely effectiveness of particular interventions
    Gunn (1978 in Hunter 2003) has identified ten common barriers to effective health policy
    implementation:

     The circumstances external to the implementing agency impose crippling constraints
     Lack of adequate time and sufficient resources
     The required combination of resources is not available
     The policy to be implemented is not based on a valid theory of cause and effect
     The relationship between cause and effect is indirect and there are multiple intervening links
     Dependency relationships are multiple
     There is a poor understanding of, and disagreement on, objectives
     Tasks are not fully specified in correct sequence
     There is imperfect communication and coordination




                                                    cxxi
8. Liaison services
     Liaison services include facilitating communications, establishing partnership contract plans
     and procedures, managing conflicts, providing immediate resolution for concerns, and
     evaluating collaboration parameters
     A liaison officer is an employee who builds and maintains mutually beneficial relationships,
     facilitates communications and coordinates activities among two or more people, agencies or
     organizations. Often a member of the public relations team, liaison officers are company
     representatives that streamline operations and handle public communications, coordination
     efforts, incident response and conflict resolution. They act as technical or subject matter
     experts for the person, agency or organization they represent.


Roles and responsibilities of a liaison officer


A liaison officer works in fast-paced, high-pressure environments and must be willing to take
initiative to proactively solve conflicts and address issues. Liaison officer duties include the
following:


    acting as contact points for all agency or organizational personnel;

    keeping lists of the agencies or personnel representing the person, agency or organization;

    facilitating meetings and cooperation among people, agencies and organizations;

    identifying problems in communications among these groups;

    collaborating and communicating with necessary constituents and the public; and

    Conducting post-mortems when an incident is wrapped up.
Requirements for a successful liaison services in an organization

2.   Champions: The liaison person must believe that the program is worthwhile
The ideal liaison person is:

                                                  cxxii
      a champion: someone who genuinely believes in the program and advocates for it
       energetically
      an opinion leader: someone with informal organizational influence
      A boundary spanner: someone well-connected in their workplace who can also
       communicate effectively with the program providers.
We found that where liaison people held an indifferent or negative view of the program they
unintentionally undermined it, while those who were enthusiastic amplified others’ enthusiasm.
So genuine support for the program is more important than influence or connections.


2. Credibility: The liaison person should be an authentic advocate for the program
Colleagues judged the suitability and effectiveness of their liaison person in terms of how well
they modelled and espoused research-informed policymaking. This suggests that for a liaison
person to be a credible champion they must be perceived as someone who believes in what they
are saying and knows what they are talking about.


3. Connections: The liaison person should have sound cross-organizational knowledge and
networks
The program was more creatively tailored and integrated, and better attuned to each
organization’s professional development expectations, when their liaison person consulted with
colleagues and advised the program providers. Liaison people’s ability to act as intermediaries
required them to have (or be able to rapidly acquire) knowledge about multiple aspects of their
organization. Broad connections across the organization ensured that their championing efforts
were not restricted to local contexts, but it was their nuanced understanding of diverse
organizational needs and perspectives that enabled them to represent and respond to their
colleagues so effectively.


4. Social skills: The liaison person should have good interpersonal and communication skills
The quality of connections was as important as the quantity for supporting organizational
understanding and engagement. Our most effective liaison people were persuasive, approachable
and well-liked: people are more inclined to do things for people they like. Adaptability and
project management skills were also vital.



                                               cxxiii
5. Support: Organizational leaders need to visibly back the liaison person as well as the
program
Strong, visible support from managers assured liaison people that their efforts – even when they
verged on ‘nagging’ – were seen as reasonable and warranted. Colleagues confirmed that evident
support from above increased the liaison person’s authority and demonstrated they were acting
on behalf of management.


6. Incentives: If possible, the liaison person role should be incentivized within the organization
Liaison people were more enthusiastic about the implementation when they benefited
professionally from the role. This included building tasks into performance indicators and
increased organizational status or exposure. But incentives should not pressure liaison people to
coerce participation.


7. Clear expectations: Organizations need clear upfront guidance about the liaison person role
The liaison people in our study had strikingly different perceptions of their role (eg. as event
organizers, project managers, collaborators, connectors, translators and integrators). Liaison
people and their managers needed to see the role as skilled facilitation rather than merely
administration, and to understand its key attributes, responsibilities, support needs and likely
time commitments. The program providers must describe these clearly and realistically.
8. Flexibility: The liaison role can be interpreted by each organization
Providing it does not compromise implementation fidelity, it may help to take a flexible
approach to the liaison role, so that core objectives and tasks are specified but the strategies for
achieving them are developed locally. For example, organizations might prefer to divide the role
between two members of staff: one taking responsibility for administration and another for
creative and strategic decisions.


9. Collaboration: The program providers should work with the liaison person in planning and
problem-solving
Where liaison people shared insider knowledge, harnessed local communication channels and
made suggestions for increasing the benefits of the program, activities were assessed by the
program providers and participants as more attractive and useful. This suggests that working
with liaison people as program development partners, rather than as conduits, could increase our
ability to develop fit-for-purpose programs that respond sensitively to local conditions.
                                                cxxiv
9. Monitoring and evaluation of services
Monitoring is a continuing function that uses systematic collection of data on specific indicators
to provide the management and the main stakeholders of an ongoing intervention with
indications of the extent of achievement of objectives and progress in the use of allocated funds.
Indicators
An indicator is a quantitative or qualitative variable that allows changes produced by an
intervention relative to what was planned to be measured. It provides a reasonably simple and
reliable basis for assessing achievement, change or performance. An indicator is preferably
numerical and can be measured over time to show changes. Indicators, which are determined
during the planning phase of a project, usually have the following components:
 What is to be measured? (What is going to change? E.g., higher number of patients operated
   on a certain condition)
 Unit of measurement to be used (to describe the change, e.g., percentage)
 Pre-programme status (sometimes called the “baseline”, e.g., 40 per cent in 2007)
 Size, magnitude or dimension of intended change (e.g., 75 per cent in 2008)
 Quality or standard of the change to be achieved (e.g., improvement such that patients
   hospital stay was lowered)
 Target populations(s) (e.g., girls vulnerable to teenage pregnancies from villages)
 Time frame (e.g., January 2008 to January 2009)




Evaluation
   Evaluation is the systematic and objective assessment of ongoing and/or completed projects,
   programmes or policies, in respect of their:
            Design
            Implementation

                                               cxxv
          Results
The criteria applied in the evaluation are:
          Objectives
          Efficiency
          Effectiveness
          Impact
          Sustainability
Evaluation emphasizes the assessment of outcomes and impact rather than the delivery of
outputs.
Differences between monitoring and evaluation
Table 1
                                 Monitoring                     Evaluation

 Timing                          Monitoring is a continuing     Evaluation assesses the
                                 function that takes place      entire project cycle.
                                 throughout the
                                 implementation of a
                                 project/programme.

 Depth and purpose               Monitoring is a regular part   Evaluation reviews the
                                 of project or programme        achievements of the project/
                                 management. It focuses on      programme and considers
                                 the implementation of the      whether the plan was the
                                 project, comparing what is     best one to achieve the
                                 delivered with what was        outcomes
                                 planned
                                                                Evaluation measures
                                                                achievements, as well as
                                                                positive/ negative and
                                                                intended/ unintended effects.
                                                                Evaluation looks for lessons
                                                                to be learned from both
                                                                success and lack of success,

                                              cxxvi
                                                                    and also looks for best
                                                                    practices which can be
                                                                    applied elsewhere.

     Who conducts it                Monitoring is usually done      Evaluation is best conducted
                                    by people directly involved     by an independent outsider
                                    in implementing the project/    who can be impartial in
                                    programme.                      consulting project/
                                                                    programme staff.




     Relationship between monitoring and evaluation

     Data collected and insights gained in the course of monitoring between are then fed into
     and used by the evaluation process.




Importance of monitoring and evaluation in an organization
    Greater transparency and accountability
One of the greatest benefits of M&E is helping organizations to track, analyses and report on
relevant information and data throughout the life cycle of a project. This allows the project team
to provide robust evidence for all their actions and decisions to stakeholders, donors and
community members from day one. On the other hand, stakeholders and donors acquire the
                                               cxxvii
information and understanding they need to collaborate, communicate, provide inputs and make
informed decisions about strategy improvements and project operations. Additionally, M&E
helps donors to weigh the efficacy of their funds in a project, which influences their current and
future funding plans.


    Improved project performance
A well planned M&E helps the project team to get a better understanding of the target
population’s needs. This helps to define the scope of the project and design objectives that are
relevant, measurable and achievable. A well-defined M&E plan also clarifies the process and
interventions that will lead to the project’s outputs and deliverable. Moreover, M&E helps the
team to plan an end-to-end indicator management system, identify effective tools and
methodologies to measure, analyses and demonstrate every intervention and its impact on
expected outcomes. This enables organizations to see their progress and identify gaps as they
arise and make timely amendments to achieve the desired results.
    Effective resource allocation
All project operations are interwoven around project budgets. The amount of available cash
dictates the duration and magnitude of interventions, choices of resources, number of employees
etc. M&E is an effective tool for enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of finances in project
implementation. M&E facilitates with the estimation of the value, worth and impact of project
components; and enables the team to verify what works and what doesn’t and where more
money should be invested or where budget should be cut. M&E allows the team to make
appropriate changes to the financial plan on a regular basis to avoid unfavorable contingencies.


    Promotes learning & data-driven decision making
M&E data provides quantifiable results to help the involved parties to learn from project
successes and challenges and be more adaptive. Involved parties are better prepared to respond
to the ever-evolving project situations, determine what worked and what did not and why it did
not work and how it could be improved and make revisions based on data evidence, rather than
assumptions. The team is able to establish links between the past, present and future actions to
improve project implementation and to identify what could be replicated and scaled up for
sustainability of the current project and for future endeavors.



                                               cxxviii
    Systematic management of organization
M&E also functions as a performance management tool as it facilitates organizations to gather,
disseminate and utilize information and data to improve their internal operations and add value to
their organization. Organizations can thus focus on their objectives such as enhancing
performance, encouraging innovation, sharing and integrating lessons learned for continuous
improvement etc. M&E also streamlines organizational procedures to achieve constructive
coordination among different stakeholders and organizational units.


10. Reports
A report is a document that presents information in an organized format for a specific audience
and purpose. Although summaries of reports may be delivered orally, complete reports are
almost always in the form of written documents.
Types of reports in an organization
Routine or Special:
A Routine Report is prepared and presented as a routine work and at a regular period of time. For
example, the annual report of an association or a company which has to be prepared by the
secretary or by the Board of Directors at the end of every financial year and copies have to be
distributed among the members.

A routine report contains some facts or information either in detail or in a summarized form. It
may also be of critical type containing some remark or opinion. For example, the auditor’s report
on the final accounts of a company. Departmental managers or branch managers have to
regularly submit routine reports to the higher authorities.

A Special Report is prepared and presented not as a matter of routine. This is prepared on the
basis of some enquiry or investigation either by a single individual or by a body or a committee
or a subcommittee or a commission specially formed or entrusted with the duty

General or Confidential:
A General Report is that which is for distribution among many, like the members of an
organization- Such reports may be printed in large numbers or even published in newspapers for
the public information. The Government publishes reports of different committees or
commissions and places them on sale to the public.

                                                cxxix
A Confidential Report is meant for some superior person or persons and is not for general
information. Sometimes the report may be so confidential that the secretary or any other person
preparing it. Writes it by hand or types it out him-self.

Formal or Informal:
A Formal Report is that which is prepared according to some prescribed form and at a prescribed
time and is presented according to a conventional procedure. For example, the annual report of a
company or any association, a report of a branch to its head office, etc.

30.     Functions or importance of a report in an organization

       Provides Information: The very purpose of preparing a report is providing
         information to various levels of management. The term management includes
         Foreman, Supervisor, Chairman, Department Manager, General Manager and Special
         Officer. These people are getting information like trend of the business, cash flow and
         fund flow etc.
       Helps in Selection: Out of the many information available, only relevant information is
         included in the report. A report brings many alternatives out of which a management
         has to choose one profitable alternative.
       Role in Control System: A target is fixed well in advance in an organization. The
         management has to see whether the employees are working according to the targets and
         standards. The reports are prepared in such a way as to measure the actual performance
         with the budgeted targets. If there is any unfavorable variances, the reasons are find out
         and remedial or corrective actions are taken by the management. In this way, a report
         is used as a control tool. A management can control with the help of this tool.
       Helpful in Profitable Operations: A report highlights the direction of moving the
         business and the level of operation. On the basis of this type of report, a management
         can give clear cut instructions as how to increase the profitability to its employees.
       Follow the Principle of Management by Exception: A management has only a
         minimum time to exercise control. Hence, the activities, which are not carried out
         according to planning and budget, are highlighted before the management. This is the
         way of following the principle of management by exception.



                                                 cxxx
       Helpful in Achieving Overall Objectives: Report motivates the executives and
         employees to take necessary steps towards increasing the earnings of the organization
         significantly. In this way, the management is achieving the maximum profit with the
         help of reporting system.
11. Environment protection regulations
Environmental protection is the practice of protecting the natural environment by individuals,
organizations and governments. Its objectives are to conserve natural resources and the existing
natural environment and, where possible, to repair damage and reverse trends
Waste disposal and management
Waste management or Waste disposal is all the activities and actions required to manage waste
from its inception to its final disposal. This includes amongst other things, collection, transport,
treatment and disposal of waste together with monitoring and regulation. It also encompasses the
legal and regulatory framework that relates to waste management encompassing guidance on
recycling etc.

31.     The Benefits of Waste Management

There are multiple benefits to treating and managing waste. In this section, we will take a closer
look at them.


Better Environment

Probably the biggest advantage of managing waste is that it eventually leads to a better and
fresher environment.


Waste disposal units also contribute to the well-being of people by helping them become disease-
free. The best part: all of this happens while the unnecessary is duly disposed of in a proper and
sanitary manner. Multiple waste disposal units should be placed in tier-1 and tier-2 cities in a bid
to prep up the process of waste disposal. This will also help implement remarkable safety
measures in the long run.




                                                cxxxi
Reduces Pollution

When waste is managed the right way, it doesn’t merely eliminate the subsequent waste but also
reduces the impact and the intensity of harmful greenhouse gases like carbon-di-oxide, carbon
mono-oxide, and methane that are often exuded from accumulated wastes in landfills.


Managing waste reduces our reliance on landfills while also significantly cutting down the many
factors that adversely impact our environment.


Conserves Energy

Recycling is one of the biggest aspects of waste management, and over time, it helps conserve
energy. One of the biggest instances of this advantage can be traced to the practice of recycling
paper.


All of us are probably aware that thousands of trees are cut to produce paper. When a used paper
is recycled to create new paper, the need of cutting trees is significantly minimized. This helps
conserve energy while also reducing your carbon footprints.


Creates Employment

The recycling industry alone creates hundreds of jobs. As more people adopt this eco-friendly
practice, organizations creating and selling recycled products come to the forefront. This helps
boost their business while also creating hundreds of jobs.


Helps Make a Difference

By managing waste, you are also making a difference to the society and the world in general.
While none of us can completely get rid of garbage, we can always adopt eco-friendly practices
of reducing and reusing waste. This way, you create an example for the people around you, who
in turn are now motivated to embrace a sustainable approach.




                                               cxxxii
Source: R. (2020, May 29).

There are eight major categories of waste management, and each of them can be divided into
numerous sub-categories.


The categories include source reduction and reuse, animal feeding, recycling, composting,
fermentation, landfills, incineration, and land application. Some of these methods like reduction
and reuse can be started from the comfort of your homes.


32.    Various Methods of Waste Disposal

Although there are many methods of disposing of waste, in this section let’s take a look at some
of the most commonly used methods that you should know about waste management.




                                              cxxxiii
Landfills

Throwing daily waste/garbage in the landfills is the most popularly used method of waste
disposal used today. This process of waste disposal focuses attention on burying the waste in the
land. Landfills are commonly found in developing countries.


There is a process used that eliminates the odors and dangers of waste before it is placed into the
ground.


While it is true this is the most popular form of waste disposal, it is certainly far from the only
procedure and one that may also bring with it an assortment of space.


This method is becoming less these days although, thanks to the lack of space available and the
strong presence of methane and other landfill gases, both of which can cause numerous
contamination problems.


Landfills give rise to air and water pollution which severely affects the environment and can
prove fatal to the lives of humans and animals. Many areas are reconsidering the use of landfills.


Incineration/Combustion

Incineration or combustion is a type disposal method in which municipal solid wastes are burned
at high temperatures. The process eventually converts them into residues and gaseous products.


The biggest advantage of this type of method is that it can reduce the volume of solid waste to 20
to 30 percent of the original volume. Additionally, it also decreases the space they take up while
also reducing the stress on landfills. Incinerators are primarily used in thermal treatment where
solid waste materials are converted to heat, gas, steam, and ash. Incineration is also widely
popular in countries where landfill space is no longer available, such as the US and Japan.


Recovery and Recycling

Resource recovery is the process of taking useful discarded items for a specific next use. These
discarded items are then processed to extract or recover materials and resources or convert them
                                                cxxxiv
to energy in the form of useable heat, electricity or fuel. Recycling is the process of converting
waste products into new products to prevent energy usage and consumption of fresh raw
materials. Recycling is the third component of Reduce, Reuse and Recycle waste hierarchy.


The idea behind recycling is to reduce energy usage, reduce the volume of landfills, reduce air
and water pollution, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and preserve natural resources for future
use.


Plasma gasification

Plasma gasification is another form of waste management. Plasma is primarily an electrically
charged or highly ionized gas. Lighting is one type of plasma that produces temperatures that
exceed 12,600 °F. With this method of waste disposal, a vessel uses characteristic plasma torches
operating at +10,000 °F which is creating a gasification zone till 3,000 °F for the conversion of
solid or liquid wastes into a syngas.


During the treatment of solid waste by plasma gasification, the waste’s molecular bonds are
broken down as a result of the intense heat in the vessels and the elemental components.


Thanks to this process, the destruction of waste and dangerous materials are found. This form of
waste disposal provides renewable energy and an assortment of other fantastic benefits.


Composting

Composting is an easy and natural bio-degradation process that takes organic wastes i.e. remains
of plants and garden and kitchen waste and turns into nutrient-rich food for your plants.


Composting, normally used for organic farming, occurs by allowing organic materials to sit in
one place for months until microbes decompose it.


Note that composting is often deemed to be one of the best methods of waste disposal as it can
turn unsafe organic products into safe compost. The process, however, has its downsides. Some
people have found it to be slow, while others have observed that it takes a lot of space. But


                                               cxxxv
regardless of these issues, many people are still embracing home composting approaches to
manage and reduce waste.and turns it to


Waste to Energy (Recover Energy)

Waste-to-Energy, also widely recognized by its acronym WtE is the generation of energy in the
form of heat or electricity from waste.


Waste to energy (WtE) process involves the conversion of non-recyclable waste items into
useable heat, electricity, or fuel through a variety of processes. This type of so energy is a
renewable energy source as non-recyclable waste can be used over and over again to create it.


WtE can also help reduce carbon emissions by offsetting the need for energy from fossil sources.
Over time, this reduces global warming and makes our environment better.


Special Waste Disposal

There are certain waste types that are considered hazardous and cannot be disposed of without
special handling which will prevent contamination from occurring.


Biomedical waste is one example of such a waste disposal method. It is primarily practiced in
health care facilities and similar institutions. The special waste disposal system effectively
disposes of hazardous biomedical waste.


Avoidance/Waste Minimization

The easier method of waste management is to reduce the creation of waste materials thereby
reducing the amount of waste going to landfills.


Waste reduction can be done through recycling old materials like jar, bags, repairing broken
items instead of buying a new one, avoiding the use of disposable products like plastic bags,
reusing second-hand items, and buying items that use less designing.




                                                cxxxvi
33.    The Best Methods of Waste Management

Recycling and composting are a couple of the best methods of waste management. Composting
is so far only possible on a small scale, either by private individuals or in areas where waste can
be mixed with farming soil or used for landscaping purposes.


Recycling, on the other hand, can be widely used around the world, with plastic, paper, and
metal leading the list of the most recyclable items. Most material recycled is reused for its
original purpose. In some instances, they may also be sold for generating profits.




                                            References


Cappelli, P., “HR Implications of Healthcare Reform,” Human Resource Executive


         Online, March 29, 2010, accessed August 18,


          2011, http://www.hreonline.com/HRE/story.jsp?storyId=379096509.

Frasch, K. B., David Shadovitz, and Jared Shelly, “There’s No Whining in HR,” Human

         Resource Executive Online, June 30, 2009, accessed September 24,


                                               cxxxvii
         2010, http://www.hreonline.com/HRE/story.jsp?storyId=227738167.

Rivenbark, L., “The 7 Hidden Reasons Why Employees Leave,” HR Magazine, May 2005,

         accessed October 10,

          2010, http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m3495/is_5_50/ai_n13721406.
Buse K, Mays N, Walt G (2005). Making Health Policy. Understanding Public Health Series


          Open University Press.
Gunn LA (1978). “Why is implantation so difficult?” Management Services in Government, 33:


             169-76.
Hunter DJ (2003). Public Health Policy. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Jenkin RA, Jorm CM, Frommer MS (2013) Translating indicators and targets into public health
           action. In: Guest C, Ricciardi W, Kawachi I, Lang I (eds) Oxford Handbook of
            Public Health Practice, 3rd edition. Oxford University Press.
Powell AE, Davies HTO, Bannister J, Macrea WA (2009) “Understanding the challenges of
            service change – learning from acute pain services in the UK.” Journal of the Royal
            Society of Medicine, 102(2): 62-8

R. (2020, May 29). What is Waste Management and Various Methods of Waste Disposal?

       Conserve Energy Future. https://www.conserve-energy-future.com/waste-management-and-

       waste-disposal-methods.php


Wotela, K. (2017). A proposed monitoring and evaluation curriculum based on a model that

       institutionalises monitoring and evaluation. African Evaluation Journal, 5(1).

       https://doi.org/10.4102/aej.v5i1.186


Special issue of the International Journal of Human Resource Management: Digitization and the

       transformation of human resource management. (2018). The International Journal of

       Human Resource Management, 1–5. https://doi.org/10.1080/09585192.2018.1503845
                                              cxxxviii
Lunenburg, F. C., & Ornstein, A. (2021). Educational Administration: Concepts and Practices

       (7th ed.). SAGE Publications, Inc.


Nicholson, JD, W. C. (2005). Standard operating procedures. Journal of Emergency

       Management, 3(6), 25. https://doi.org/10.5055/jem.2005.0060


Reed, M. E. (2000). Policies and procedures governing the use of new devices in operating

       rooms. Aesthetic Surgery, 20(3), 0258–0259. https://doi.org/10.1067/maj.2000.107329


Impact of Motivation on Employees. (2016). International Journal of Science and Research

       (IJSR), 5(2), 1836–1839. https://doi.org/10.21275/v5i2.nov161570



Why Are Standard Operating Procedures Important?
The important task of writing policies and procedures rarely gets the respect it deserves. Most
people recognize the need for having standard policies, but standard operating procedures often
get viewed as a necessary evil. Why is that?
 Good procedures and work instructions provide a way to communicate and apply consistent
standards and practices within your organization.
GOOD procedures . . .

      save time and mistakes
      reduce training costs
      ensure consistent results
      empower the workforce
      get read and used
      support quality goals
      enable you to delegate work

But, BAD procedures, can be as disastrous as no procedures at all!
Bad procedures . . .
      cause errors and frustration

                                               cxxxix
      increase training costs
      waste time and money
      detract from quality goals
      don’t get read or used

12. Supervisory services
   Definition
   Supervision is a professional and collaborative activity between a supervisor and a worker in
   which the supervisor provides guidance and support to the worker to promote competent and
   ethical delivery of services and supports through the continuing development of the worker's
   application of accepted professional peer work knowledge, skills, and values.
   Benefits of supervision in an organization
          Supervision is a tool that can be used to achieve the agency’s mission and objectives
           Supervision improves performance and helps to manage resources
          The supervisor serves as the mediator and liaison between the agency and the worker
          Good supervision can increase morale and improve retention
Functions of a supervisor
a) Administrative
Administrative supervision tasks focus on the effective implementation of the agency’s policies
and procedures and the management of the peer worker’s work performance.
• Quality of work
• Work load
• Liaison to operations - payroll, human resources
• Using program resources, including time, effectively
• Conformance or fidelity to the program model
• Record keeping
b) Educative
Educative supervision tasks focus on the professional development of the worker through
training, modeling and structuring learning experiences.
• Provide time and space to reflect on peer practice
• Focus on knowledge, skills and attitudes
• Provide individualized training and support

                                                cxl
• Provide venue for supporting the peer worker’s professional development
c) Supportive
Supportive supervision tasks focus on the person’s morale and job satisfaction.
• Give feedback on work
• Discuss personal reactions to the work
• Validate and provide encouragement
• Promote self- care practices
• Advocate for peer support roles
Supervision formats
a) Individual supervision
Advantages
• Exclusive attention to the worker
• Often experienced as safer by the worker
• More confidential
Disadvantages
• Dependence can develop
• Exposure to only one perspective in supervision
• Lost opportunity to learn from colleagues
b) Group supervision
Advantages
• More efficient than individual supervision
• Supervisees share information and may learn from each other
• Can be a powerful way to reduce isolation and may foster group cohesiveness
Disadvantages
• Working in a group can be experienced as unsafe by some workers
• It may difficult to meet the specific needs of individual participants and there is a risk
discussions remain generalized and do not meet anyone’s needs in a satisfactory way
c) Co-supervision
Co - supervision is the provision of supervision by more than one supervisor • This model may
be used when the organization does not have supervisors who are peer support workers • Peer
workers may benefits from a second supervisor if their primary supervisor doesn’t have the



                                                 cxli
   expertise to help them develop in their peer practice • Often, one supervisor provides more
   administrative supervision and the other provides more education. Ideally, both provide support.
   Advantages
    • Workers benefit from the guidance of more than one person
    • Workers can develop their competencies with a skills peer support worker
   Disadvantages
         Some agencies don’t have the resources to offer co – supervision
         There may be challenges in communication or disagreements between the co-supervisors
         Co - supervisors may not share the same expectations
   Many organizations offer multiple formats of supervision to address different professional
   development needs and different workers get different learning needs addressed by different
   formats.
   12.1      Human resource management :
         Human resource management is the process of employing people, training them,
         compensating them, developing policies relating to the workplace, and developing strategies
         to retain employees
   Roles of HRM


   34.      Staffing


   You need people to perform tasks and get work done in the organization. Even with the most
   sophisticated machines, humans are still needed. Because of this, one of the major tasks in HRM
   is staffing. Staffing involves the entire hiring process from posting a job to negotiating a salary
   package. Within the staffing function, there are four main steps:
9. Development of a staffing plan. This plan allows HRM to see how many people they should
   hire based on revenue expectations.

10. Development of policies to encourage multiculturalism at work. Multiculturalism in the
   workplace is becoming more and more important, as we have many more people from a variety
   of backgrounds in the workforce.

11. Recruitment. This involves finding people to fill the open positions.




                                                    cxlii
12. Selection. In this stage, people will be interviewed and selected, and a proper compensation
    package will be negotiated. This step is followed by training, retention, and motivation.


    35.    Development of Workplace Policies


    Every organization has policies to ensure fairness and continuity within the organization. One of
    the jobs of HRM is to develop the verbiage surrounding these policies. In the development of
    policies, HRM, management, and executives are involved in the process. For example, the HRM
    professional will likely recognize the need for a policy or a change of policy, seek opinions on
    the policy, write the policy, and then communicate that policy to employees. It is key to note
    here that HR departments do not and cannot work alone. Everything they do needs to involve all
    other departments in the organization. Some examples of workplace policies might be the
    following:
   Discipline process policy

   Vacation time policy

   Dress code

   Ethics policy

   Internet usage policy


    36.    Compensation and Benefits Administration


    HRM professionals need to determine that compensation is fair, meets industry standards, and is
    high enough to entice people to work for the organization. Compensation includes anything the
    employee receives for his or her work. In addition, HRM professionals need to make sure the pay
    is comparable to what other people performing similar jobs are being paid. This involves setting
    up pay systems that take into consideration the number of years with the organization, years of
    experience, education, and similar aspects. Examples of employee compensation include the
    following:
   Pay

   Health benefits

   retirement plans or packages
                                                   cxliii
   Stock purchase plans

   Vacation time

   Sick leave

   Bonuses

   Tuition reimbursement


    37.    Retention


    Retention involves keeping and motivating employees to stay with the organization.
    Compensation is a major factor in employee retention, but there are other factors as well. Ninety
    percent of employees leave a company for the following reasons:
9. Issues around the job they are performing

10. Challenges with their manager

11. Poor fit with organizational culture

12. Poor workplace environment


    Despite this, 90 percent of managers think employees leave as a result of pay (Rivenbark, 2010).
    As a result, managers often try to change their compensation packages to keep people from
    leaving, when compensation isn’t the reason they are leaving at all.


    38.    Training and Development


    Once we have spent the time to hire new employees, we want to make sure they not only are
    trained to do the job but also continue to grow and develop new skills in their job. This results in
    higher productivity for the organization. Training is also a key component in employee
    motivation. Employees who feel they are developing their skills tend to be happier in their jobs,
    which results in increased employee retention. Examples of training programs might include the
    following:
   Job skills training, such as how to run a particular computer program

   Training on communication

                                                    cxliv
   Team-building activities

   Policy and legal training, such as sexual harassment training and ethics training


    39.    Dealing with Laws Affecting Employment


    Human resource people must be aware of all the laws that affect the workplace. An HRM
    professional might work with some of these laws:
   Discrimination laws

   Health-care requirements

   Compensation requirements such as the minimum wage

   Worker safety laws

   Labor laws


    The legal environment of HRM is always changing, so HRM must always be aware of changes
    taking place and then communicate those changes to the entire management organization. Rather
    than presenting a chapter focused on HRM laws, we will address these laws in each relevant
    chapter.


    40.    Worker Protection


    Safety is a major consideration in all organizations. Oftentimes new laws are created with the
    goal of setting federal or state standards to ensure worker safety. Unions and union contracts can
    also impact the requirements for worker safety in a workplace. It is up to the human resource
    manager to be aware of worker protection requirements and ensure the workplace is meeting
    both federal and union standards. Worker protection issues might include the following:
   Chemical hazards

   Heating and ventilation requirements

   Use of “no fragrance” zones

   Protection of private employee information



                                                   cxlv
41.    Communication

Besides these major roles, good communication skills and excellent management skills are key to
successful human resource management as well as general management.




Figure 2: summary of HRM roles




                                             cxlvi
   42.     Awareness of External Factors


   In addition to managing internal factors, the HR manager needs to consider the outside forces at
   play that may affect the organization. Outside forces, or external factors, are those things the
   company has no direct control over; however, they may be things that could positively or
   negatively impact human resources. External factors might include the following:
21. Globalization and offshoring

22. Changes to employment law

23. Health-care costs

24. Employee expectations

                                                   cxlvii
25. Diversity of the workforce

26. Changing demographics of the workforce

27. A more highly educated workforce

28. Layoffs and downsizing

29. Technology used, such as HR databases

30. Increased use of social networking to distribute information to employees


   For example, the recent trend in flexible work schedules (allowing employees to set their own
   schedules) and telecommuting (allowing employees to work from home or a remote location for
   a specified period of time, such as one day per week) are external factors that have affected HR.
   HRM has to be aware of these outside issues, so they can develop policies that meet not only the
   needs of the company but also the needs of the individuals. Another example is the Patient
   Protection and Affordable Care Act, signed into law in 2010. Compliance with this bill has huge
   implications for HR. For example, a company with more than fifty employees must provide
   health-care coverage or pay a penalty. Currently, it is estimated that 60 percent of employers
   offer health-care insurance to their employees (Cappelli, 2010). Because health-care insurance
   will be mandatory, cost concerns as well as using health benefits as a recruitment strategy are big
   external challenges. Any manager operating without considering outside forces will likely
   alienate employees, resulting in unmotivated, unhappy workers. Not understanding the external
   factors can also mean breaking the law, which has a concerning set of implications as well.




                                     Figure 3; Key external factors




                                                  cxlviii
 An understanding of key external factors is important to the successful HR professional. This
  allows him or her to be able to make strategic decisions based on changes in the external
                                        environment.



12.2   Resource utilization



                                             cxlix
    Resource utilization refers to the metric that indicates whether your whole team, or individual
    employees, are fully booked. It describes the process of planning a project and ensuring the
    available resources in the company are being used to their highest potential. It helps project
    managers identify which of their employees are being over utilized so they can allocate
    responsibilities to someone else if needed, and can also assist in identifying the people who are
    underutilized, so they can assign new projects to them.
    Resource Allocation vs. Resource Utilization
    While the purpose of both processes may seem similar, there are some key distinctions to be
    drawn between the two:

         Resource allocation refers to a project manager selecting suitable employees for a project,
          and then managing them as they complete the project, reassigning or altering workloads if
          necessary.
         Resource utilization is the process of strategically measuring how effective resources are.
          Allocation organizes a project, but it is utilization that makes it successful.



    43.      Benefits of resource utilization



   Proper utilization of resources is important for maintaining productivity, because it prevents staff
    from underperforming or being overburdened by workloads and burning out.

   Projects can be managed with better visibility, reducing the risk of oversights

   Maximum utilization of resources gives you a better ROI (Return on investment)
   It ensures that specific resources aren’t being over or under-utilized

   It allows property management systems to be agile and reschedule resources as quickly as
    possible to avoid problems surfacing or becoming worse

    Tips for Implementing Resource Utilization
    When a company has a robust resource management platform, project managers have access to
    the tools needed to approach and master effective resource utilization. Some key tips to keep in
    mind include:


                                                        cl
   Leverage Visibility – especially for larger companies, several projects may be running at the
    same time, and while they exist separately they still affect one another down the line. Rather
    than looking at projects as separate entities, formulate a resource utilization plan that can
    provide insight into project-specific metrics, as well as an overview of all resources in the
    company. This way, you will be able to assess overall work capacity
    and resource performance on a bigger picture scale, helping identify any company-wide
    areas of improvement.
   Beware of Scope Creep – projects are shape shifting by nature, so some will inevitably
    demand additional time and resources. It is the responsibility of the project manager to
    ensure projects don’t go over allotted time or budget. A resource utilization strategy can help
    centralize all active projects, leveraging resources equally amongst them to help keep things
    within their optimal scope.
   Always Be Prepared – as a project manager, you need to be prepared for any and
    all scenarios. During your planning process, visualize and run through various situations that
    could arise, and prepare for a change of circumstances as if it were inevitable. This way, if
    the budget changes, or a resource is lost, your team will be able to adapt more quickly.




12.3   Service delivery
Service delivery can be defined as any contact with the public administration during which
customers – citizens, residents or enterprises – seek or provide data, handle their affairs or fulfil
their duties. These services should be delivered in an effective, predictable, reliable and
customer-friendly manner.
The four key elements for successful service delivery system are
                                                  cli
9. Service Culture is built on elements of leadership principles, norms, work habits and vision,
      mission and values. Culture is the set of overriding principles according to which management
      controls, maintains and develops the social process that manifests itself as delivery of service and
      gives value to customers. Once a superior service delivery system and a realistic service concept
      have been established, there is no other component as fundamental to the long-term success of a
      service organization as its culture.
10. Employee Engagement includes employee attitude activities, purpose driven leadership and HR
      processes. Even the best designed processes and systems will only be effective if carried out by
      people with higher engagement. Engagement is the moderator between the design and the
      execution of the service excellence model.
11. Service Quality includes strategies, processes and performance management systems. The
      strategy and process design is fundamental to the design of the overall service management
      model. Helping the client fulfil their mission and supporting them in the pursuit of their
      organizational purpose, must be the foundation of any service provider partnership.
12. Customer Experience includes elements of customer intelligence, account management and
      continuous improvements. Perception is king and constantly evaluating how both customer and
      end-user perceive service delivery is important for continuous collaboration. Successful service
      delivery works on the basis that the customer is a part of the creation and delivery of the service
      and then designs processes built on that philosophy – this is called co-creation




      12.4   Motivation of employees
      Definition: Employee motivation is defined as the enthusiasm, energy level, commitment and
      the amount of creativity that an employee brings to the organization on a daily basis.
      Employee motivation is all about how engaged an employee feels in tandem to the organization’s
      goals and how empowered he/she feels. Motivation is of two types:


       Intrinsic motivation
       Extrinsic motivation
      Motivated employees are an asset to an organization, they are directly proportional to an
      organization’s success. Motivation is intangible, difficult to measure and extremely difficult to
                                                       clii
 control, but very easy to facilitate if done right. It’s all about intention, intensity, and
 perseverance


 Intrinsic motivation
 Intrinsic motivation means that an individual is motivated from within. He/she has the desire to
 perform well at the workplace because the results are in accordance with his/her belief system.


 An individual’s deep-rooted beliefs are usually the strongest motivational factors. Such
 individuals show common qualities like acceptance, curiosity, honor, and desire to achieve
 success.


 Extrinsic motivation
 Extrinsic motivation means an individual’s motivation is stimulated by external factors- rewards
 and recognition. Some people may never be motivated internally and only external motivation
 would work with them to get the tasks done.




 Ways of motivating employees
21. Employee motivation surveys: Use an online survey software or platform to conduct
   employee motivation surveys. Let them give candid and genuine feedback about their
   experience, ideas, and suggestions. This will help you identify areas that need your attention.
22. Employee satisfaction surveys: Employee satisfaction depends on a ton of factors such as
   work environment, infrastructure, roles and responsibilities, etc. Conducting employee
   satisfaction surveys will help Managers understand dissatisfaction factors and act on them.
   Frequent surveys will help addressing dissatisfaction issues faster.
23. Job well done- recognize it! Recognition plays a huge role in increasing the motivation levels
   of the employees. It helps create a healthy bond between the employer and employees. It not
   only fulfills our basic need of esteem but also facilitates belonging.
24. Focus on intrinsic rewards: It is true some people need rewards to get tasks done, but
   extrinsic rewards fade very quickly. Focus on motivating your employees from within. Some
                                                    cliii
   may even say, “yeah this is all good but we got to eat and pay rent”… well, that’s true, for that
   you compensate your employees well, but make sure you create values for your organization
   that are long-lasting.
25. Autonomy not bureaucracy: Micromanagement is the worst thing you can do as a manager.
   It is not only time consuming, but also really unwanted. If you have hired people with certain
   skillset let them do their job, be a facilitator, not a dictator. Human beings value autonomy,
   give them the freedom to get things done in ways acceptable and see the changes.
26. Create an amazing work environment: According to a study conducted by Ohio State
   University, your work environment seriously impacts your mood. So it does make sense to
   invest in the work environment where people actually spend 60 hours a week. Creating a good
   atmosphere will motivate your staff. Just go ahead and do it.
27. Be a visionary: Lead with vision. Employees need to know their efforts are driving something
   important. They need to know their destination and more importantly the path that will take
   them there. If as a leader you lack the vision for your own organization, how do you expect
   them to own up to your vision? Make a visual reminder of your organization’s road map,
   encourage your employees to add to that. You will be surprised how innovative they can get.
28. Solicit ideas and suggestions, act on them: Now that you have conducted surveys, you have
   received feedback from your employees. Ensure that the ideas, suggestions, grievances that
   they have put forth will looked into and addressed in a timely fashion.
29. Career-pathing: Having a career growth plan with clearly mentioned roles and
   responsibilities is crucial to employees. It helps them focus, and direct their efforts to an
   achievable goal. Make sure that you sit down with every employee and come up with a career
   plan that is transparent and communicated clearly.
30. Provide flexibility: Not all employees are alike. Some prefer coming to work daily, others not
   much. For some, commuting to work might be long and challenging. Allow some flexibility
   within reason and your employees will be happy and motivated
   Importance of employee motivation
 According to psychologists, self-realization is a very human thing. It is our basic nature to
 nurture something and see it flourish, it is applicable to most things we do in our day-to-day life.
 This is true for both social and societal spaces.




                                                     cliv
    Motivation plays a very important factor in a human’s life. Whether it is about improving
    ourselves or our organization’s performance. Motivated employees don’t need to be told how to
    get things done, they take initiatives, are eager to take up additional responsibilities, are
    innovative and go-getters.
    Motivated employees ensure:


     There is a positive atmosphere within the organization
     Co-workers are happy and feel safe at work
     Make sure clients are happy
     They always achieve better results than their counterparts
    Motivation, therefore, plays a very important factor and ensures employees remain active and
    contribute their best towards their organization. Furthermore, a high level of motivation leads to
    a lower level of employee turnover


    Herzberg’s motivation theory
    Herzberg’s motivation theory or two-factor theory says there are two factors to which an
    organization can adjust to influence the levels of motivation at the workplace.


    The two factors identified by Herzberg are:


    1. Motivating factors: The presence of motivating factors encourages employees to work harder.
    They are the factors found in the workplace.


    2. Hygiene factors: Hygiene factor if not present will discourage employees from doing their best
    at work. Hygiene factors are the surrounding factors that facilitate employee’s behavior.
    Here are some of the examples of motivators and hygiene factor


                              Motivators                                                     Hygiene Factors

                              Recognition                                                           Security

                                 Growth                                                     Company policies



                                                      clv
                        Achievements                                                         Salary

                        The work itself                                               Work conditions

                        Responsibility                                              Manager/supervisor

There are 4 statistics that are involved here:


1. High hygiene & high motivation


This is an ideal situation any manager or supervisor would want to achieve. Here all the
employees are happily motivated and have very few grievances.


2. High hygiene & low motivation


In this situation, employees have very few grievances but are also not highly motivated. A very
good example of this situation is employees are paid well but the work is not very interesting.
Employees simply collect their pay cheques and leave.


3. Low hygiene and high motivation


This is a tricky one, here employees are highly motivated but also have numerous grievances. A
typical example of a situation like this is when the work is extremely interesting but the
employees are not paid as per the market standard.


4. Low hygiene & low motivation


No points for guessing, it is obviously a pretty bad situation. Here neither the employees are
motivated nor are the hygiene factors are in place.


How to apply Herzberg’s motivation theory in practice
1. First and foremost rectify and change bureaucratic company policies. Make sure your Human
Resources is in line with what other organizations are offering and they know what the



                                                 clvi
leadership’s expectations are. Keeping both in mind draft policies that is a win-win with
everyone.


2. Ensure your managers are also mentors and not just bosses. Each employee should be
respected and supported.


3. Organizational culture plays a very crucial role here. No cliches here.


4. Make sure the compensation, perks, and bonuses are as per the market standards. If you don’t
compensate your employees well, why would they show interest in taking any initiatives?


5. To increase job satisfaction make sure the jobs are constructed well and employees find their
jobs meaningful.


6. Delegate your employees’ responsibilities, make them feel valued. Respect their individuality,
listen to their feedback seriously and take action wherever necessary.


3. Implementation of policies at work place
Policy implementation is generally defined as a series of activities undertaken by government
or organizations to achieve the goals and objectives articulated in policy statements
Policy implementation process
To implement effective policies and procedures at your workplace, follow these steps to get the
best results.
44.     Step 1: Consultation

When developing your policies and procedures, you must consult with all relevant stakeholders,
including health and safety representatives, contractors (particularly those who work with you
regularly), and of course your employees.

Consultation should ensure that every person in your workplace understands the importance of
company policies and procedures and why they need to be implemented effectively.

It will also ensure that the policies and procedures are realistic and actionable on a daily basis.


                                                 clvii
Tip: Consultation helps to achieve more effective policies and procedures, and is a greater
motivation for employees to follow them.

45.    Step 2: Tailor the policy to your business

The policies and procedures you adopt need to be tailored to the needs of your business, not just
lifted straight from a generic manual.

If you use policies and procedures from another source, it is essential that you adapt them to your
company and your workplace operations.

46.    Step 3: Define obligations clearly – be specific!

All policies should be short and succinct.

All procedural steps should be set out in clear and plain English.

This will create an ‘auditable standard’, meaning that you create a standard that can be used to
measure whether your workplace health and safety obligations are being met or not.

The obligations outlined in an auditable standard should be defined in enough detail that persons
in your workplace understand exactly what is expected of them.

Specifically state what actions should be taken. For example, don’t say “dispose of chemicals
safely“, but state how this should be done at the site, e.g. “chemicals must be disposed of in the
designated approved dangerous goods waste drum“.

47.    Step 4: Make the policy realistic

Make sure your business has the time, resources and personnel to implement the policy.

There is no point in adopting a policy which aspires to the best practice possible if your business
cannot realistically adopt the procedures set out.




                                                clviii
This is the development stage of the policy and procedure done. Once you have completed these
steps, you will have the policies and procedures your company needs to maintain a healthy and
safe workplace.

But the next stage is just as important as the development stage, the implementation stage…

Don’t get too excited that you have developed the policies and procedures because without
implementing them correctly, they won’t be of any use to you.

48.    Step 5: Publicize the policies and procedures

Put your policies and procedures in writing and make them available to your entire workforce.

If possible, keep all your policies and procedures in a single manual, and make copies readily
available to all employees.

Tip: Safety documents should also be published on the company’s intranet if you have one.

49.    Step 6: Train all employees in policies and procedures

You have an obligation to provide adequate information, instruction, supervision and training to
your employees.

Ensure that new employees and contractors are trained and familiar with company policies and
procedures, and that existing staff receive appropriate training, e.g. annual refresher courses.

Policies and procedures should also be reiterated and discussed with staff regularly at team
meetings to ensure that employees remain aware of the importance & advantages of the policies
and procedures.

Tip: It is a good idea to have all employees and contractors sign off after they have read,
understood and agree to comply with your workplace policies. You should also keep records of
training and induction. Make sure that you record attendees and details of training content in
case an employee fails to sign a training record.




                                                 clix
50.       Step 7: Be consistent in your policy implementation

Supervision of your workplace to ensure that the policies and procedures are being properly
implemented by all employees is essential.

Follow-up to ensure that any failure to follow the policy or procedure is addressed.

Specify that full compliance with the stated requirements is needed to ensure a safe workplace.

After this, any deliberate breaches of policies or procedures must be treated seriously, and dealt
with immediately and consistently.

All supervisors and managers must ‘lead by example’ in implementing policies and procedures.

If managers condone practices which do not fall within the policy, it could be argued that
disciplinary action against an employee who fails to follow the policy is unfair. The consequence
of any deliberate breach should be appropriate to the severity of the breach, whether it be:

         counselling;
         disciplinary action (e.g. a warning); or
         In serious circumstances, dismissal.

51.       Step 8: Review all policies and procedures regularly

Policies and procedures must be reviewed periodically.

When any changes occur, ensure your policies and procedures remain relevant and effective. For
example, a change may occur when a business purchases a new piece of machinery, starts using
a new chemical or adopts a new production method. Any such changes mean that relevant
procedures should be reviewed.

Tip: The review cycle will depend on the circumstances and document type, but it is a good idea
to review policies at least every 2 years

Implement a document management system that:


                                                     clx
             triggers reviews;
             notes the dates of change; and
             Involves interactive revision.

    All employees and contractors need to be made aware of the changes to policy and procedure
    when they occur.

    52.       Step 9: Enforce the workplace policies and procedures

    Once your policies and procedures have been implemented, they need to be enforced. Make sure
    that you approach this consistently as this is an important factor in being able to discipline a
    worker for a breach of policy.

    Problems of Policy Implementation
    53.       Equality, Equity and Policy: Problems of Policy Implementation
    Theoretical framework

    Implementation is the process of turning policy into practice. However, it is common to observe
    a ‘gap’ between what was planned and what actually occurs as a result of policy implementation.
    There are three major theoretical models of policy implementation (Buse et al, 2005).

    Top-down approach: This approach sees policy formation and policy execution as distinct
    activities. Policies are set at higher levels in a political process and are then communicated to
    subordinate levels which are charged with the technical, managerial, and administrative tasks of
    putting policy into practice. Political scientists have theorized that the top-down approach
    requires that certain conditions be in place for policy implementation to be effective including:

     Clear and logically consistent objectives
     Adequate causal theory (to how particular actions would lead to desired outcomes)
      An implementation process designed to enhance compliance by implementers (using
      incentives and sanctions)
     Committed, skillful implementing officials
     Support from interest groups and legislature
     No changes in socio-economic conditions that undermine political support or the causal theory
      underlying the policy

                                                     clxi
     Adequate time and sufficient resources available
     Good coordination and communication




    Problems associated with the top down approach:

     It is very unlikely that all pre-conditions would be present at the same time
     Only adopts perspective of those in higher levels of government and neglects the role of other
      actors
     Risks over-estimating the impact of government action (neglects other factors)
     Difficult to apply where no single, dominant policy or agency is involved
     Policies change as they are being implemented
    Bottom-up approach: This approach recognizes that individuals at subordinate levels are likely
    to play an active part in implementation and may have some discretion to reshape objectives of
    the policy and change the way it is implemented. The bottom-up approach sees policy
    implementation is an interactive process involving policy makers, implementers from various
    levels of government, and ‘street level bureaucrats’ such as frontline staff. Policy may change
    during implementation.
    Problems of the bottom-up approach:

     Evaluating the effects of a policy becomes difficult
     Difficult to separate the influence of individuals and different levels of government on policy
      decisions and consequences. (Important for bureaucratic accountability)
    Principal-agent theory: In each situation there will be a relationship between principals (those
    who define policy) and agents (those who implement policy), which may include contracts or
    agreements that enable the principal to specify what is provided and check that this has been
    accomplished. The amount of discretion given to the agents and the complexity of the principal-
    agent relationship are affected by:

     The nature of the policy problem- including scale of change required, size of affected group,
      simple vs. complex intervention, ill-defined vs. clear policy, many cause vs. single cause,
      degree of political sensitivity, length of time before changes become apparent.


                                                   clxii
     The context or circumstances surrounding the problem- political and economic climate,
      technological change
     The organization of the machinery required to implement the policy- number of formal and
      informal agencies, amount of skills and resources required.
    In practice

    Interpretation of policy directives requires the translation of knowledge on interventions into the
    particular local context. Factors to take into account when interpreting health policy include
    (Jenkin et al 2013):
     Local resources, including human resources and infrastructure
     Specific characteristics of the population
     Baseline incidence of the health problem
     The latency period before an effect of the intervention will be observed
     Local variations in the likely effectiveness of particular interventions
    Gunn (1978 in Hunter 2003) has identified ten common barriers to effective health policy
    implementation:

     The circumstances external to the implementing agency impose crippling constraints
     Lack of adequate time and sufficient resources
     The required combination of resources is not available
     The policy to be implemented is not based on a valid theory of cause and effect
     The relationship between cause and effect is indirect and there are multiple intervening links
     Dependency relationships are multiple
     There is a poor understanding of, and disagreement on, objectives
     Tasks are not fully specified in correct sequence
     There is imperfect communication and coordination




                                                    clxiii
13. Liaison services
     Liaison services include facilitating communications, establishing partnership contract plans
     and procedures, managing conflicts, providing immediate resolution for concerns, and
     evaluating collaboration parameters
     A liaison officer is an employee who builds and maintains mutually beneficial relationships,
     facilitates communications and coordinates activities among two or more people, agencies or
     organizations. Often a member of the public relations team, liaison officers are company
     representatives that streamline operations and handle public communications, coordination
     efforts, incident response and conflict resolution. They act as technical or subject matter
     experts for the person, agency or organization they represent.


Roles and responsibilities of a liaison officer


A liaison officer works in fast-paced, high-pressure environments and must be willing to take
initiative to proactively solve conflicts and address issues. Liaison officer duties include the
following:


    acting as contact points for all agency or organizational personnel;

    keeping lists of the agencies or personnel representing the person, agency or organization;

    facilitating meetings and cooperation among people, agencies and organizations;

    identifying problems in communications among these groups;

    collaborating and communicating with necessary constituents and the public; and

    Conducting post-mortems when an incident is wrapped up.
Requirements for a successful liaison services in an organization

3.   Champions: The liaison person must believe that the program is worthwhile
The ideal liaison person is:

                                                  clxiv
      a champion: someone who genuinely believes in the program and advocates for it
       energetically
      an opinion leader: someone with informal organizational influence
      A boundary spanner: someone well-connected in their workplace who can also
       communicate effectively with the program providers.
We found that where liaison people held an indifferent or negative view of the program they
unintentionally undermined it, while those who were enthusiastic amplified others’ enthusiasm.
So genuine support for the program is more important than influence or connections.


2. Credibility: The liaison person should be an authentic advocate for the program
Colleagues judged the suitability and effectiveness of their liaison person in terms of how well
they modelled and espoused research-informed policymaking. This suggests that for a liaison
person to be a credible champion they must be perceived as someone who believes in what they
are saying and knows what they are talking about.


3. Connections: The liaison person should have sound cross-organizational knowledge and
networks
The program was more creatively tailored and integrated, and better attuned to each
organization’s professional development expectations, when their liaison person consulted with
colleagues and advised the program providers. Liaison people’s ability to act as intermediaries
required them to have (or be able to rapidly acquire) knowledge about multiple aspects of their
organization. Broad connections across the organization ensured that their championing efforts
were not restricted to local contexts, but it was their nuanced understanding of diverse
organizational needs and perspectives that enabled them to represent and respond to their
colleagues so effectively.


4. Social skills: The liaison person should have good interpersonal and communication skills
The quality of connections was as important as the quantity for supporting organizational
understanding and engagement. Our most effective liaison people were persuasive, approachable
and well-liked: people are more inclined to do things for people they like. Adaptability and
project management skills were also vital.



                                                clxv
5. Support: Organizational leaders need to visibly back the liaison person as well as the
program
Strong, visible support from managers assured liaison people that their efforts – even when they
verged on ‘nagging’ – were seen as reasonable and warranted. Colleagues confirmed that evident
support from above increased the liaison person’s authority and demonstrated they were acting
on behalf of management.


6. Incentives: If possible, the liaison person role should be incentivized within the organization
Liaison people were more enthusiastic about the implementation when they benefited
professionally from the role. This included building tasks into performance indicators and
increased organizational status or exposure. But incentives should not pressure liaison people to
coerce participation.


7. Clear expectations: Organizations need clear upfront guidance about the liaison person role
The liaison people in our study had strikingly different perceptions of their role (eg. as event
organizers, project managers, collaborators, connectors, translators and integrators). Liaison
people and their managers needed to see the role as skilled facilitation rather than merely
administration, and to understand its key attributes, responsibilities, support needs and likely
time commitments. The program providers must describe these clearly and realistically.
8. Flexibility: The liaison role can be interpreted by each organization
Providing it does not compromise implementation fidelity, it may help to take a flexible
approach to the liaison role, so that core objectives and tasks are specified but the strategies for
achieving them are developed locally. For example, organizations might prefer to divide the role
between two members of staff: one taking responsibility for administration and another for
creative and strategic decisions.


9. Collaboration: The program providers should work with the liaison person in planning and
problem-solving
Where liaison people shared insider knowledge, harnessed local communication channels and
made suggestions for increasing the benefits of the program, activities were assessed by the
program providers and participants as more attractive and useful. This suggests that working
with liaison people as program development partners, rather than as conduits, could increase our
ability to develop fit-for-purpose programs that respond sensitively to local conditions.
                                                 clxvi
14. Monitoring and evaluation of services
Monitoring is a continuing function that uses systematic collection of data on specific indicators
to provide the management and the main stakeholders of an ongoing intervention with
indications of the extent of achievement of objectives and progress in the use of allocated funds.
Indicators
An indicator is a quantitative or qualitative variable that allows changes produced by an
intervention relative to what was planned to be measured. It provides a reasonably simple and
reliable basis for assessing achievement, change or performance. An indicator is preferably
numerical and can be measured over time to show changes. Indicators, which are determined
during the planning phase of a project, usually have the following components:
 What is to be measured? (What is going to change? E.g., higher number of patients operated
   on a certain condition)
 Unit of measurement to be used (to describe the change, e.g., percentage)
 Pre-programme status (sometimes called the “baseline”, e.g., 40 per cent in 2007)
 Size, magnitude or dimension of intended change (e.g., 75 per cent in 2008)
 Quality or standard of the change to be achieved (e.g., improvement such that patients
   hospital stay was lowered)
 Target populations(s) (e.g., girls vulnerable to teenage pregnancies from villages)
 Time frame (e.g., January 2008 to January 2009)




Evaluation
   Evaluation is the systematic and objective assessment of ongoing and/or completed projects,
   programmes or policies, in respect of their:
            Design
            Implementation

                                               clxvii
          Results
The criteria applied in the evaluation are:
          Objectives
          Efficiency
          Effectiveness
          Impact
          Sustainability
Evaluation emphasizes the assessment of outcomes and impact rather than the delivery of
outputs.
Differences between monitoring and evaluation
Table 1
                                 Monitoring                     Evaluation

 Timing                          Monitoring is a continuing     Evaluation assesses the
                                 function that takes place      entire project cycle.
                                 throughout the
                                 implementation of a
                                 project/programme.

 Depth and purpose               Monitoring is a regular part   Evaluation reviews the
                                 of project or programme        achievements of the project/
                                 management. It focuses on      programme and considers
                                 the implementation of the      whether the plan was the
                                 project, comparing what is     best one to achieve the
                                 delivered with what was        outcomes
                                 planned
                                                                Evaluation measures
                                                                achievements, as well as
                                                                positive/ negative and
                                                                intended/ unintended effects.
                                                                Evaluation looks for lessons
                                                                to be learned from both
                                                                success and lack of success,

                                              clxviii
                                                                    and also looks for best
                                                                    practices which can be
                                                                    applied elsewhere.

     Who conducts it                Monitoring is usually done      Evaluation is best conducted
                                    by people directly involved     by an independent outsider
                                    in implementing the project/    who can be impartial in
                                    programme.                      consulting project/
                                                                    programme staff.




     Relationship between monitoring and evaluation

     Data collected and insights gained in the course of monitoring between are then fed into
     and used by the evaluation process.




Importance of monitoring and evaluation in an organization
    Greater transparency and accountability
One of the greatest benefits of M&E is helping organizations to track, analyses and report on
relevant information and data throughout the life cycle of a project. This allows the project team
to provide robust evidence for all their actions and decisions to stakeholders, donors and
community members from day one. On the other hand, stakeholders and donors acquire the
                                               clxix
information and understanding they need to collaborate, communicate, provide inputs and make
informed decisions about strategy improvements and project operations. Additionally, M&E
helps donors to weigh the efficacy of their funds in a project, which influences their current and
future funding plans.


    Improved project performance
A well planned M&E helps the project team to get a better understanding of the target
population’s needs. This helps to define the scope of the project and design objectives that are
relevant, measurable and achievable. A well-defined M&E plan also clarifies the process and
interventions that will lead to the project’s outputs and deliverable. Moreover, M&E helps the
team to plan an end-to-end indicator management system, identify effective tools and
methodologies to measure, analyses and demonstrate every intervention and its impact on
expected outcomes. This enables organizations to see their progress and identify gaps as they
arise and make timely amendments to achieve the desired results.
    Effective resource allocation
All project operations are interwoven around project budgets. The amount of available cash
dictates the duration and magnitude of interventions, choices of resources, number of employees
etc. M&E is an effective tool for enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of finances in project
implementation. M&E facilitates with the estimation of the value, worth and impact of project
components; and enables the team to verify what works and what doesn’t and where more
money should be invested or where budget should be cut. M&E allows the team to make
appropriate changes to the financial plan on a regular basis to avoid unfavorable contingencies.


    Promotes learning & data-driven decision making
M&E data provides quantifiable results to help the involved parties to learn from project
successes and challenges and be more adaptive. Involved parties are better prepared to respond
to the ever-evolving project situations, determine what worked and what did not and why it did
not work and how it could be improved and make revisions based on data evidence, rather than
assumptions. The team is able to establish links between the past, present and future actions to
improve project implementation and to identify what could be replicated and scaled up for
sustainability of the current project and for future endeavors.



                                                clxx
    Systematic management of organization
M&E also functions as a performance management tool as it facilitates organizations to gather,
disseminate and utilize information and data to improve their internal operations and add value to
their organization. Organizations can thus focus on their objectives such as enhancing
performance, encouraging innovation, sharing and integrating lessons learned for continuous
improvement etc. M&E also streamlines organizational procedures to achieve constructive
coordination among different stakeholders and organizational units.


15. Reports
A report is a document that presents information in an organized format for a specific audience
and purpose. Although summaries of reports may be delivered orally, complete reports are
almost always in the form of written documents.
Types of reports in an organization
Routine or Special:
A Routine Report is prepared and presented as a routine work and at a regular period of time. For
example, the annual report of an association or a company which has to be prepared by the
secretary or by the Board of Directors at the end of every financial year and copies have to be
distributed among the members.

A routine report contains some facts or information either in detail or in a summarized form. It
may also be of critical type containing some remark or opinion. For example, the auditor’s report
on the final accounts of a company. Departmental managers or branch managers have to
regularly submit routine reports to the higher authorities.

A Special Report is prepared and presented not as a matter of routine. This is prepared on the
basis of some enquiry or investigation either by a single individual or by a body or a committee
or a subcommittee or a commission specially formed or entrusted with the duty

General or Confidential:
A General Report is that which is for distribution among many, like the members of an
organization- Such reports may be printed in large numbers or even published in newspapers for
the public information. The Government publishes reports of different committees or
commissions and places them on sale to the public.

                                                clxxi
A Confidential Report is meant for some superior person or persons and is not for general
information. Sometimes the report may be so confidential that the secretary or any other person
preparing it. Writes it by hand or types it out him-self.

Formal or Informal:
A Formal Report is that which is prepared according to some prescribed form and at a prescribed
time and is presented according to a conventional procedure. For example, the annual report of a
company or any association, a report of a branch to its head office, etc.

54.     Functions or importance of a report in an organization

       Provides Information: The very purpose of preparing a report is providing
         information to various levels of management. The term management includes
         Foreman, Supervisor, Chairman, Department Manager, General Manager and Special
         Officer. These people are getting information like trend of the business, cash flow and
         fund flow etc.
       Helps in Selection: Out of the many information available, only relevant information is
         included in the report. A report brings many alternatives out of which a management
         has to choose one profitable alternative.
       Role in Control System: A target is fixed well in advance in an organization. The
         management has to see whether the employees are working according to the targets and
         standards. The reports are prepared in such a way as to measure the actual performance
         with the budgeted targets. If there is any unfavorable variances, the reasons are find out
         and remedial or corrective actions are taken by the management. In this way, a report
         is used as a control tool. A management can control with the help of this tool.
       Helpful in Profitable Operations: A report highlights the direction of moving the
         business and the level of operation. On the basis of this type of report, a management
         can give clear cut instructions as how to increase the profitability to its employees.
       Follow the Principle of Management by Exception: A management has only a
         minimum time to exercise control. Hence, the activities, which are not carried out
         according to planning and budget, are highlighted before the management. This is the
         way of following the principle of management by exception.



                                                clxxii
       Helpful in Achieving Overall Objectives: Report motivates the executives and
         employees to take necessary steps towards increasing the earnings of the organization
         significantly. In this way, the management is achieving the maximum profit with the
         help of reporting system.
16. Environment protection regulations
Environmental protection is the practice of protecting the natural environment by individuals,
organizations and governments. Its objectives are to conserve natural resources and the existing
natural environment and, where possible, to repair damage and reverse trends
Waste disposal and management
Waste management or Waste disposal is all the activities and actions required to manage waste
from its inception to its final disposal. This includes amongst other things, collection, transport,
treatment and disposal of waste together with monitoring and regulation. It also encompasses the
legal and regulatory framework that relates to waste management encompassing guidance on
recycling etc.

55.     The Benefits of Waste Management

There are multiple benefits to treating and managing waste. In this section, we will take a closer
look at them.


Better Environment

Probably the biggest advantage of managing waste is that it eventually leads to a better and
fresher environment.


Waste disposal units also contribute to the well-being of people by helping them become disease-
free. The best part: all of this happens while the unnecessary is duly disposed of in a proper and
sanitary manner. Multiple waste disposal units should be placed in tier-1 and tier-2 cities in a bid
to prep up the process of waste disposal. This will also help implement remarkable safety
measures in the long run.




                                                clxxiii
Reduces Pollution

When waste is managed the right way, it doesn’t merely eliminate the subsequent waste but also
reduces the impact and the intensity of harmful greenhouse gases like carbon-di-oxide, carbon
mono-oxide, and methane that are often exuded from accumulated wastes in landfills.


Managing waste reduces our reliance on landfills while also significantly cutting down the many
factors that adversely impact our environment.


Conserves Energy

Recycling is one of the biggest aspects of waste management, and over time, it helps conserve
energy. One of the biggest instances of this advantage can be traced to the practice of recycling
paper.


All of us are probably aware that thousands of trees are cut to produce paper. When a used paper
is recycled to create new paper, the need of cutting trees is significantly minimized. This helps
conserve energy while also reducing your carbon footprints.


Creates Employment

The recycling industry alone creates hundreds of jobs. As more people adopt this eco-friendly
practice, organizations creating and selling recycled products come to the forefront. This helps
boost their business while also creating hundreds of jobs.


Helps Make a Difference

By managing waste, you are also making a difference to the society and the world in general.
While none of us can completely get rid of garbage, we can always adopt eco-friendly practices
of reducing and reusing waste. This way, you create an example for the people around you, who
in turn are now motivated to embrace a sustainable approach.




                                               clxxiv
Source: R. (2020, May 29).

There are eight major categories of waste management, and each of them can be divided into
numerous sub-categories.


The categories include source reduction and reuse, animal feeding, recycling, composting,
fermentation, landfills, incineration, and land application. Some of these methods like reduction
and reuse can be started from the comfort of your homes.


56.    Various Methods of Waste Disposal

Although there are many methods of disposing of waste, in this section let’s take a look at some
of the most commonly used methods that you should know about waste management.




                                               clxxv
Landfills

Throwing daily waste/garbage in the landfills is the most popularly used method of waste
disposal used today. This process of waste disposal focuses attention on burying the waste in the
land. Landfills are commonly found in developing countries.


There is a process used that eliminates the odors and dangers of waste before it is placed into the
ground.


While it is true this is the most popular form of waste disposal, it is certainly far from the only
procedure and one that may also bring with it an assortment of space.


This method is becoming less these days although, thanks to the lack of space available and the
strong presence of methane and other landfill gases, both of which can cause numerous
contamination problems.


Landfills give rise to air and water pollution which severely affects the environment and can
prove fatal to the lives of humans and animals. Many areas are reconsidering the use of landfills.


Incineration/Combustion

Incineration or combustion is a type disposal method in which municipal solid wastes are burned
at high temperatures. The process eventually converts them into residues and gaseous products.


The biggest advantage of this type of method is that it can reduce the volume of solid waste to 20
to 30 percent of the original volume. Additionally, it also decreases the space they take up while
also reducing the stress on landfills. Incinerators are primarily used in thermal treatment where
solid waste materials are converted to heat, gas, steam, and ash. Incineration is also widely
popular in countries where landfill space is no longer available, such as the US and Japan.


Recovery and Recycling

Resource recovery is the process of taking useful discarded items for a specific next use. These
discarded items are then processed to extract or recover materials and resources or convert them
                                                clxxvi
to energy in the form of useable heat, electricity or fuel. Recycling is the process of converting
waste products into new products to prevent energy usage and consumption of fresh raw
materials. Recycling is the third component of Reduce, Reuse and Recycle waste hierarchy.


The idea behind recycling is to reduce energy usage, reduce the volume of landfills, reduce air
and water pollution, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and preserve natural resources for future
use.


Plasma gasification

Plasma gasification is another form of waste management. Plasma is primarily an electrically
charged or highly ionized gas. Lighting is one type of plasma that produces temperatures that
exceed 12,600 °F. With this method of waste disposal, a vessel uses characteristic plasma torches
operating at +10,000 °F which is creating a gasification zone till 3,000 °F for the conversion of
solid or liquid wastes into a syngas.


During the treatment of solid waste by plasma gasification, the waste’s molecular bonds are
broken down as a result of the intense heat in the vessels and the elemental components.


Thanks to this process, the destruction of waste and dangerous materials are found. This form of
waste disposal provides renewable energy and an assortment of other fantastic benefits.


Composting

Composting is an easy and natural bio-degradation process that takes organic wastes i.e. remains
of plants and garden and kitchen waste and turns into nutrient-rich food for your plants.


Composting, normally used for organic farming, occurs by allowing organic materials to sit in
one place for months until microbes decompose it.


Note that composting is often deemed to be one of the best methods of waste disposal as it can
turn unsafe organic products into safe compost. The process, however, has its downsides. Some
people have found it to be slow, while others have observed that it takes a lot of space. But


                                               clxxvii
regardless of these issues, many people are still embracing home composting approaches to
manage and reduce waste.and turns it to


Waste to Energy (Recover Energy)

Waste-to-Energy, also widely recognized by its acronym WtE is the generation of energy in the
form of heat or electricity from waste.


Waste to energy (WtE) process involves the conversion of non-recyclable waste items into
useable heat, electricity, or fuel through a variety of processes. This type of so energy is a
renewable energy source as non-recyclable waste can be used over and over again to create it.


WtE can also help reduce carbon emissions by offsetting the need for energy from fossil sources.
Over time, this reduces global warming and makes our environment better.


Special Waste Disposal

There are certain waste types that are considered hazardous and cannot be disposed of without
special handling which will prevent contamination from occurring.


Biomedical waste is one example of such a waste disposal method. It is primarily practiced in
health care facilities and similar institutions. The special waste disposal system effectively
disposes of hazardous biomedical waste.


Avoidance/Waste Minimization

The easier method of waste management is to reduce the creation of waste materials thereby
reducing the amount of waste going to landfills.


Waste reduction can be done through recycling old materials like jar, bags, repairing broken
items instead of buying a new one, avoiding the use of disposable products like plastic bags,
reusing second-hand items, and buying items that use less designing.




                                               clxxviii
57.    The Best Methods of Waste Management

Recycling and composting are a couple of the best methods of waste management. Composting
is so far only possible on a small scale, either by private individuals or in areas where waste can
be mixed with farming soil or used for landscaping purposes.


Recycling, on the other hand, can be widely used around the world, with plastic, paper, and
metal leading the list of the most recyclable items. Most material recycled is reused for its
original purpose. In some instances, they may also be sold for generating profits.




                                            References


Cappelli, P., “HR Implications of Healthcare Reform,” Human Resource Executive


         Online, March 29, 2010, accessed August 18,


          2011, http://www.hreonline.com/HRE/story.jsp?storyId=379096509.

Frasch, K. B., David Shadovitz, and Jared Shelly, “There’s No Whining in HR,” Human

         Resource Executive Online, June 30, 2009, accessed September 24,


                                               clxxix
         2010, http://www.hreonline.com/HRE/story.jsp?storyId=227738167.

Rivenbark, L., “The 7 Hidden Reasons Why Employees Leave,” HR Magazine, May 2005,

         accessed October 10,

          2010, http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m3495/is_5_50/ai_n13721406.
Buse K, Mays N, Walt G (2005). Making Health Policy. Understanding Public Health Series


          Open University Press.
Gunn LA (1978). “Why is implantation so difficult?” Management Services in Government, 33:


             169-76.
Hunter DJ (2003). Public Health Policy. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Jenkin RA, Jorm CM, Frommer MS (2013) Translating indicators and targets into public health
           action. In: Guest C, Ricciardi W, Kawachi I, Lang I (eds) Oxford Handbook of
            Public Health Practice, 3rd edition. Oxford University Press.
Powell AE, Davies HTO, Bannister J, Macrea WA (2009) “Understanding the challenges of
            service change – learning from acute pain services in the UK.” Journal of the Royal
            Society of Medicine, 102(2): 62-8

R. (2020, May 29). What is Waste Management and Various Methods of Waste Disposal?

       Conserve Energy Future. https://www.conserve-energy-future.com/waste-management-and-

       waste-disposal-methods.php


Wotela, K. (2017). A proposed monitoring and evaluation curriculum based on a model that

       institutionalises monitoring and evaluation. African Evaluation Journal, 5(1).

       https://doi.org/10.4102/aej.v5i1.186


Special issue of the International Journal of Human Resource Management: Digitization and the

       transformation of human resource management. (2018). The International Journal of

       Human Resource Management, 1–5. https://doi.org/10.1080/09585192.2018.1503845
                                              clxxx
Lunenburg, F. C., & Ornstein, A. (2021). Educational Administration: Concepts and Practices

       (7th ed.). SAGE Publications, Inc.


Nicholson, JD, W. C. (2005). Standard operating procedures. Journal of Emergency

       Management, 3(6), 25. https://doi.org/10.5055/jem.2005.0060


Reed, M. E. (2000). Policies and procedures governing the use of new devices in operating

       rooms. Aesthetic Surgery, 20(3), 0258–0259. https://doi.org/10.1067/maj.2000.107329


Impact of Motivation on Employees. (2016). International Journal of Science and Research

       (IJSR), 5(2), 1836–1839. https://doi.org/10.21275/v5i2.nov161570




                                             clxxxi
                       CHAPTER THIRTEEN:
          MANAGEMENT OF PERIOPERATIVE THEATRE RESOURCES
Unit of learning code: HE/CU/TT/CR/06/6/A
Related Unit of Competency in Occupational Standard: Manage Perioperative Theatre
                                       Resources
                      138   1.1 Introduction to the unit of learning

This unit standard specifies competencies required to Plan and Prepare to Manage Perioperation
Theatre resources, Organise Perioperation Theatre resources,Direct Perioperation Theatre
resources ,Control Perioperation Theatre resources and Document Perioperation Theatre
resources.

                     139    1.2 Summary of Learning Outcomes
  1) Plan and Prepare to Manage Perioperation Theatre resources
  2) Organise Perioperation Theatre resources
  3) Direct Perioperation Theatre resources
  4) Control Perioperation Theatre resources
  5) Document Perioperation Theatre resources

   1.2.1 Learning Outcome 1: Plan and Prepare to Manage Perioperation Theatre resources
   1.2.2 Introduction to the learning outcome
Upon completion of this unit, the trainees should be able to demonstrate knowledge, skills and
attitude on basic management, management theories, perioperation theatre resources, Theatre
layout and Resource mobilization.

   1.2.3 Performance Standard
 1. Operation theatre resources are identified according to Standard Management Principles
 2. PT resources are gathered according to Standard Management Principles and work place
     policy
 3. Condition of PT resources is verified as per Standard Management Principles

     Definition of terms
Theory: a supposition or a system of ideas intended to explain something, especially one based
on general principles independent of the thing to be explained
Resources: a stock or supply of money, materials, staff, and other assets that can be drawn on
by a person or organization in order to function effectively
Policy: a course of action adopted and pursued by a government, ruler, political party, etc.: our
nation's foreign policy. action or procedure conforming to or considered with reference to
prudence or expediency: It was good policy to consent
Content/procedures/methods/illustrations
                                             182
   Plan and Prepare to Manage Perioperation Theatre resources
Management: is the coordination and administration of tasks to achieve a goal. Such
administration activities include setting the organization's strategy and coordinating the efforts
of staff to accomplish these objectives through the application of available resources.
Basic management
What Is Management?
Management is essential to any organization that wishes to be efficient and achieve its aims.
Without someone in a position of authority there would be organizational anarchy with no
structure and very little, if any focus. It has been said that management has four basic functions
– planning, organizing, leading and controlling. Common sense dictates that without these
principles of management being in place an organization would have trouble achieving its aims,
or even coming up with aims in the first place! A classic theory on the principles of management
was written by Henri Fayol. It seeks to divide management into 14 principles. We’ll take a look
at these basic principles of management and explain them in easy to understand terminology.



Principles of Management – Fayol’s 14 Principles
    Division of Work – This principle of management is based on the theory that if workers
     are given a specialized task to do, they will become skillful and more efficient in it than if
     they had a broader range of tasks. Therefore, a process where everyone has a specialized
     role will be an efficient one.
    Authority – This principle looks at the concept of managerial authority. It looks at how
     authority is necessary in order to ensure that managerial commands are carried out. If
     managers did not have authority then they would lack the ability to get work carried out.
     Managers should use their authority responsibly and ethically.
    Discipline – This principle relates to the fact that discipline is needed within an
     organization for it to run effectively. Organizational rules, philosophies, and structures
     need to be met. In order to have disciplined workers, managers must build a culture of
     mutual respect and motivation.
    Unity of command – There should be a clear chain of command in place within an
     organization. An employee should know exactly whose instructions to follow.
    Unity of direction – Work should be organized in a way that means employees are working
     in harmony toward a shared objective or goal using a shared method or procedure.
    Subordination individual interests to the collective interests – The interests of the
     organization as a whole should take precedence over the interests of any individual
     employee or group of employees. This encourages a team spirit and collective mentality of
     all for one and one for all.
    Remuneration – In order to motivate and be fair to employees, they should be paid a
     reasonable rate for the work they carry out. An organization that underpays will struggle
     to attract quality workers who are motivated.



                                              183
    Centralization – This principle relates to whether decisions should be made centrally, as in
     from the top down, or in a more democratic way, from the bottom up. Different decision-
     making processes are appropriate for different types of decisions.
   Scalar chain – This relates to the principle of a clear chain of communication existing
     between employees and superiors. The chain should be respected, unless speedy
     communication is vital, in which case the chain may be bypassed if all parties consent.
   Order – This relates to the proper use of resources and their effective deployment in a
     structured fashion.
   Equity – Managers should behave ethically towards those they manage. Almost every
     organization in the modern world will have a written set of policies and procedures which
     will outline exactly what is expected from staff at all levels.
   Stability of tenure of personnel – It is seen as desirable within an organization to have a
     low staff turnover rate. This is due to the benefits that come with having experienced staff
     and the time and expense needed to train new ones. There should be a clear and efficient
     method of filling any staff vacancies that arise.
   Initiative – Employees that have an input as to how to best do their job are likely to feel
     more motivated and respected. Many organizations place a great deal of emphasis on
     listening to the concerns of staff.
   Morale – Keeping a high level of morale and team spirit is an essential part of having the
     most productive organization possible. Happy and motivated employees are far more likely
     to be productive and less absent.
Management theories
There are two major but opposing schools of thought in management: scientific management
and the human relations–based approach. As its
The four main classifications of management:
• Classical Theories (Scientific Management)
• Human Relations or Behavioural Approach Theories • Systems Theories
• Contingency Theories

What is Classical Management Theory?
• Classical management theory involves creating multiple levels of workers to improve
productivity.
• Employees at the lowest levels find their tasks overseen by supervisors who, in turn, are
overseen by managers. At every level, employees are expected to perform tasks according to
specific procedures designed to maximize productivity.
• In addition, this theory focuses on an impersonal side of business. Employees and managers
should not allow friendliness and personal interactions to become involved with the
organization. Rules must be followed exactly, and the hiring and firing of employees must relate
only to the skills they possess
Classical Theories:
Scientific Approach to Management

                                             184
The approach relied on systematic information collection, analysis and identification of causes
and effects, followed by effective organization o management structure.
The objective was to develop basic principles that could guide the design, creation and
maintenance of organizations. The emphasis was on efficiency and effectiveness. Some of the
prominent figures that may be identified with the classical school of thought are:

1. Frederic W. Taylor
 2. Henri Fayol
3. Max Weber

1. Frederic W. Taylor
Frederic W. Taylor, an engineer, was instrumental in conducting research on methods of training
workers for increased production. He believed in the principle ‘best management is a true
science’.
• According to Taylor the objective of management is to secure the maximum prosperity for the
employer, as well as each employee. Taylor's system for work improvement consisted of the
following steps:
• Observing the workers’ performance through time and motion to determine the best way to
carry out each task.
• Scientifically selecting the best worker to perform each job, that is, the person with the
characteristics and abilities needed to carry out tasks efficiently.
• Training the selected worker to perform tasks in the most efficient manner. • Appointing a few
highly skilled workers in managerial positions.
• Most of the views expressed by Taylor can be, and are, applied in nursing, where our aim is to
recruit the best qualified workers, train them and appoint them to precise specialized positions.
• Scientifically selecting the best worker to perform each job, that is, the person with the
characteristics and abilities needed to carry out tasks efficiently.
• Training the selected worker to perform tasks in the most efficient manner.
• Appointing a few highly skilled workers in managerial positions.
• Most of the views expressed by Taylor can be, and are, applied in nursing, where our aim is to
recruit the best qualified workers, train them and appoint them to precise specialized positions.
2. Henri Fayol
• Henri Fayol came up with the functions of a manager, which he identified as planning,
organizing, coordinating and controlling. He also identified a set of fourteen principles which
managers might apply as they perform their duties. Some of these include the division of labour
and specialization, chain of command, centralization and responsibility.
Fayol, Five Basic Functions Management
• Planning: Deciding what needs to happen in the future and generating plans for action
(deciding in advance).
• Organizing nonhuman
(or staffing): Making sure the human and resources are put into place
                                             185
• Coordinating: Creating a structure through which an organization's goals can be accomplished.

• Commanding (or leading): Determining what must be done in a situation and getting people to
do it.
• Controlling: Checking progress against plans
3. Max Weber
• Max Weber advocated bureaucracy as the ideal form of organization for a complex institution.
He described Bureaucracy as having a well defined hierarchy of authority, pyramidal in shape,
division of labour based on specialization and highly specific rules governing employers’ duties
and rights. He claimed that bureaucracy was superior because it provided stability and reliability
in controlling employees.
Although Weber meant well, the term bureaucracy implies slowness and inefficiency in today’s
society. Bureaucracies are often seen as too rigid to respond to current and rapid changes in the
society.
Behavioral Approach /Human Relations Theories
• Abraham Maslow's Theory
• Douglas McGregor: Theory x and Theory y • Vroom's Expectancy Theory
• Fredrick Herzberg's Two Factor Theory
What is Human Relations Theory?
• Human relations theory, also known as behavioral management theory, focuses more on the
individuals in a workplace than the rules, procedures and processes. Instead of directives coming
directly from management, a human relations theory provides communication between
employees and managers, allowing them to interact with one another to help make decisions.
Instead of giving workers quotas and requiring certain procedures, workers are exposed to
motivational and emotional tactics to get them to increase productivity. The focus of this style
is creating fulfilled, productive workers and helping workers invest in a company.
1. Abraham Maslow's Theory
• According to Maslow's theory, every human being has basic needs. People are motivated by
the desire to satisfy these needs. Once a need is satisfied it ceases to be a motivator. As one need
is satisfied, another appears and takes its place, and the individual is then motivated to satisfy
the new need.
The theory also assumes that a person can satisfy one need at a time. Maslow, a psychologist,
developed the hierarchy of needs with the physiological needs at the bottom, which the
individuals must satisfy before realising higher level needs. Maslow visualised needs as
arranged in hierarchical order starting with basic needs, progressing to higher needs depending
on the individual.
There are more people at the base of the triangle still trying to satisfy the basic needs and fewer
people were on the higher subsequent levels. Only a small percentage of people can reach the
top of the hierarchy.



                                              186
Figure 1: Showing Abraham Maslow's Theory




                                       187
Link:https://www.google.com/url?sa=i&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.simplypsychology.org%
2Fmaslow




• The various needs can be further defined as follows:
• Physiological needs are those needs that are required for survival.These include food, oxygen
and sleep, sex and rest.
                                            188
• Safety needs refer to the need for job security, shelter and a stable environment.
• Love and belonging indicate a need for affectionate relations with others as well as the need to
belong to a group.
• Self esteem refers to the need for self respect and recognition. At this stage people strive for
power, achievement and status.
• Self actualization is a need for self fulfilment and is the culmination of all other needs.
2. Douglas McGregor: Theory X and Theory Y
• McGregor's theory 'X' and 'Y' are a set of management assumptions about the behavior of
subordinates. He noted that most managers make these assumptions about their employees.
• The first sets of assumption are known as Theory 'X’ they include:
• An average human being has an inherent dislike for work and will avoid it if possible.
• As a result of the assumption above, most people must be coerced, controlled, directed and
threatened with punishment in order to produce.
• The average human being has to be closely directed, wishes to avoid responsibility and only
wants security.
 • The second set of assumptions known as Theory 'Y’ regard people in a more favorable way.
They state that:
• Employees like work, which is as natural as rest or play.
• Human beings do not have to be controlled or coerced as long as commitment to the
organisation is present.
• Under proper conditions, they will not only accept but also seek responsibility.

3. Vroom’s Expectancy Theory of Motivation
• By Victor Vroom.
• It examines motivation from the perspective of why people choose to follow a particular course
of action.
Vroom introduces three variables: Valence, Expectancy & Instrumentality
i). Valence -positivity
• This is the importance that the individual places upon the expected outcome of a situation.
Ii). Expectancy- effort
This is the belief that output from the individual and the success of the situation are linked, for
example, if I work harder then the outcome will be better
iii). Instrumentality- reward
• This is the belief that the success of the situation is linked to the expected outcome of the
situation, for example, it's gone really well, so I'd expect praise.
• At first glance, this theory would seem most applicable to a traditional attitude work situation
where the level of motivation depends on whether the employee wants the reward on offer for
doing a good job and whether they believe more effort will lead to that reward.
• However, it could equally apply to any situation where someone does something because they
expect a certain outcome. For example, I recycle paper because I think it is important to conserve
resources and take a stand on environmental issues (valence), I think that the more effort I put
                                              189
into recycling, the more paper I will recycle (expectancy) and I think that the more paper I
recycle, the less resources will be used (instrumentality
4. Fredrick Herzberg’s Two Factor Theory (Dual Structure Theory)
• Frederick Herzberg proposed a theory of motivation based on the idea that some factors
motivate and some demotivate. He called this theory the ‘Two Factor Theory’. According to
Frederick Herzberg, these factors fall into two categories.
I.    Motivation Factors ii. Hygiene Factors
• what motivates workers and what demotivates them are two separate elements that act
independently of one another.
• Motivators, such as challenging work, recognition and responsibility, will lead to increased
satisfaction and commitment to the organization.
• Hygiene factors, such as salary, job security, supervisory practices and benefits, do not actually
motivate employees, but will demotivate them if they are poor or missing.
Hygiene Factors
• Hygiene factors are needed to ensure an employee does not become dissatisfied. They do not
lead to higher levels of motivation, but without them there is dissatisfaction. Typical hygiene
factors are:
• Interpersonal relationships • Work conditions
• Salary • Status
• Security
Motivation Factors
• Motivation factors are needed in order to motivate an employee into higher performance.
These include:
• Achievement • Growth
• Responsibility for task • Interest in the job
Results in Four Scenarios
a. High Hygiene + High Motivation
This is the ideal scenario where employees are highly motivated and have few complaints.
b. High Hygiene + Low Motivation
In this scenario, employees have few complaints but are not highly motivated. The job is
perceived as a pay check.
c. Low Hygiene + High Motivation
In this scenario, employees are motivated but have a lot of complaints. This is a situation where
the job is exciting and challenging but salaries and work conditions are not up to par.
d. Low Hygiene + Low Motivation
This is the worst situation where employees are unmotivated and have lots of complaints.
Systems Theory
• Unlike the previous theories, the theory places an emphasis on organizations as cooperative
systems.
• A system is defined as ‘a set of arrangements of things so related or connected as to form a
unit or organic whole’.
                                              190
  • The organization is, therefore, defined as ‘a system of consciously coordinated personal
  activities or forces’ (Basawanthappa, 2000).
  • The systems theory explains that organizations come into existence when there are persons
  able to communicate with each other who will each contribute an action to accomplish a
  purpose.
  • Managers who understand systems theory recognize how different systems affect a worker and
  how a worker affects the systems around them.
  • A system is made up of a variety of parts that work together to achieve a goal. Systems theory
  is a broad perspective that allows managers to examine patterns and events in the workplace.
  • This helps managers to coordinate programs to work as a collective whole for the overall goal
  or mission of the organization rather than for isolated departments.
  For cooperation to be effective,
  The following must be present: • Place where work is done
  • Time when work is done
  • Person with whom work is done • Things upon which work is done
  • Method or process by which work is done
  • This helps in understanding the organization in a better way.
  Contingency Theory
  • This theory asserts that managers make decisions based on the situation at hand rather than a
  "one size fits all" method.
  • A manager takes appropriate action based on aspects most important to the current situation.
  Managers in a MTC may want to utilize a leadership approach that includes participation from
  workers, while a leader in the army may want to use an autocratic approach.
  • The theory asserts that when managers make a decision, they must take into account all aspects
  of the current situation and act on those aspects that are key to the situation at hand.
  • The continuing effort to identify the best leadership or management style might now conclude
  that the best style depends on the situation.
  • If one is leading troops in Somalia, an autocratic style is probably best; If one is leading a
  hospital or College, a more participative and facilitative leadership style is probably best
  Self-assessment test
1. Traits leadership theories: -
   a) Focuses on what leaders do in relational and contextual terms
  b) Emphasizes on the degrees of trust and respect between leaders and followers
  c) Is independent on personal characteristics of followers
  d) Emphasizes that physical and emotional characteristics are critical in inspiring others toward
  a common goal
2. The process of working with and through others to achieve organizational objectives is called
a) Administration
b) Leadership
c) Management
d) Team work
                                               191
  Short response questions
3. State the four (4) main classification of management theories
  Practical test
  Using a diagram, demonstrate hierarchy of human needs by Abraham Maslow

  References
  Louis A. Allen,        Management      and    Organization,    McGraw-Hill     Kogakusha,     Ltd.
  Read more: An Introduction to the Principles of Management - Principles Of Management -
  StateUniversity.com https://education.stateuniversity.com/pages/cw1ev9e9ib/An-Introduction-
  to-the-Principles-of-Management.html#ixzz6gbTXQTt2
  Link:https://www.google.com/url?sa=i&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.verywellmind.com%2F
  what-is-maslows-hierarchy-of-needs-4136760&psig=AOvVaw0Tm-
  nXIOioh1DPT3EdHzb1&ust=1608037931433000&source=images&cd=vfe&ved=2ahUKEwj
  zvOOexs3tAhXa4YUKHVZjC8kQr4kDegUIARDQAQ


                140    Learning outcome 2: Peri operation Theatre resources
     1.2.2 Introduction to the learning outcome
  Upon completion of this unit, the trainees should be able to demonstrate knowledge, skills and
  attitude on Staffing procedures/recruitment procedures, Resource allocation Organization
  structure/protocol, Communication methods and Ethics in PT

     1.2.3 Performance Standard
   1. PT activities are identified and classified according to Standard Management Procedures
       & work place policy
   2. PT duties are assigned and allocated appropriate resources according to Standard
       Management Procedures, WHO and work place policy
   3. Responsibilities and authority in PT is delegated and co-ordinated according to Standard
       Management Procedures, WHO and work place policy
       Definition of terms

Job area: Any subunit of a workforce sector, such as a department, job group, job title, etc.

Job description: A written statement detailing the duties of a particular job title.

Job group: Job or group of jobs having similar content, wage rates, and opportunities.

  Content/Procedures/methods/illustrations
  Human Resource Management
  The shift in terminology from ‘personnel’ to ’human resources’ is symbolic of a true change in
  the field. The term human resource reflects the position that people are a resource that needs to
  be managed strategically in support of the organisation’s mission.
                                                192
The effective functioning of an organisation depends upon various resources. Human resources
or manpower is one of the most vital resources for the labour intensive health institution.
Human resource management can be said to be an integral part of the role of any person who is
responsible for the work of others. In this module, human resource management will refer to a
group of specialists concerned with increasing the effectiveness of staff performance in
operating theatre.
According to Basawanthappa (2002), the main objectives of human resource management are:
Effective utilisation of human resources to enable the achievement of
organisational goals.
Establishment and maintenance of an adequate organisational structure and desirable working
relationship among staff.
Securing integration of the individual and informal groups with the organisation and thereby
ensuring their commitment, involvement and loyalty.
Recognition and satisfaction of individual needs and group goals.
Provision of maximum opportunities for individual development and advancement.
Maintenance of high morals in organisations.
 Bearing in mind the objectives covered previously, you will now look at the main aspects of
human resource management. These include:
Forecasting Future Manpower Requirements
This involves estimating the institution’s demand for labour and matching this with what is
available.
Formulating and Proposing Policies
Formulation of human resource policies is done by the human resource management department.
The policies have to be agreed upon by top management. The key areas of personnel policy
include recruitment and selection, terms and conditions of employment, training and
development as well as labour union issues, for example, laid down procedures on how to handle
strikes and disputes. These personnel policies are guidelines for behaviour and state how the
organisation will respond in relation to employee affairs.
Financial Resource Management
In the previous section, you covered the management of human resources. In this part, you are
going to examine financial
resource management. Managing finances is one of the most important roles of a theatre
technician manager. Arguments have been put forward that this function should be left to
accountants who are specialised in this area. However, if theatre technician do not have the basic
skills to enable them manage finances, they will not succeed in providing nursing services. Most
of the resources you will be managing are acquired with money.
Financial planning requires that the manager identifies objectives, policies and procedures. The
budget is one of the main tools of financial management.
Managing Time
Time is an important resource although in many cases, it is not thought of as such. It is
sometimes referred to as one of the M’s of management and stands for moments. The other M’s
                                              193
being money, manpower and materials. For example, you may recall times when you have
wished that a day had more than twenty four hours or that a week had more than seven days so
that you can accomplish the tasks you had set out to do. This often happens when you are not
managing time well.
Equipment Used in Theatre
You are now going to look at the equipment that is normally used during an operation.
Ligatures and Sutures
A suture is a stitch or series of stitches used in surgery to bring together living tissues until the
normal healing process takes place. A ligature is a suture used for tying blood vessels to arrest
bleeding.
There are two types of sutures. They can be absorbable, which means they dissolve in the tissue
after some time, for example, catgut. They can also be non-absorbable, which means that the
body tissue cannot digest the material used, for example, silkworm gut, nylon, cotton, linen, silk
and metal.
The latter must be removed when the wound is healed. Metal clips are also available and are
used in neuro-surgery to compress nerve endings, and also on skin incision to give a good grip.
Traumatic sutures are used together with a needle for suturing the skin. Ligatures are lengths of
suture material used without a needle to tie a blood vessel in order to control or arrest bleeding.
Most ligatures are non-absorbable, for example, those made of linen, cotton, silk, polyester, wire
and clips. Absorbable include chromic catgut. Metal clips can be used as ligatures.
Cutting needles, which have a sharp edge, cut a crack as they pass, and are used on strong tissues,
for example, skin, tendon, muscles.
Surgical Needles
These are made from plated carbon steel or stainless steel. The different parts of a needle are the
eye, shaft, and point. The needle is either straight or curved. There are different classes of
needles. These include:
Round bodied needles
Cutting needles, which have a sharp edge, cut a crack as they pass, and are used on strong tissues,
for example, skin,
tendon, muscles.
Atraumatic needles
Round bodied needles, which are round and smooth, cause less damage and make a puncture.
They are used in delicate tissues and organs.
Cutting needles
Atraumatic needles, which are either cutting or round bodied whose traumatising chance is
minimal. These needles have no eye. Suture and needles are made joined-together.




                                               194
Figure 2: Layout of an Operating Theatre




  Adapted from internet

  The theatre unit is a block of buildings with a series of rooms leading off a corridor with closed
  doors, which separate it from the main hospital.
  The doors reduce unnecessary movement to and from theatre. A theatre should be built in a
  central place possibly near an intensive care unit, the surgical wards and other special wards, for
  example, renal unit and burns unit.
  All these units should be in relation to each other, but construction should be separate and
  independent from all traffic and air movement within the hospital.
  A theatre unit is self contained with changing rooms, shower rooms, toilets, anaesthetic room,
  operating room, cleaning room,at least four beds, sluice room, linen room and sterilising room.
  Inside the theatre, the walls, floor and roof are built with labour saving materials for hygiene
  purposes. It has artificial ventilators, efficient artificial lights and emergency systems for use
  during power failure. The theatre furnishings and fittings are made of stainless materials for
  quick and thorough cleaning.
  All the trolleys are fitted with non-electricity conducting rubbers to minimise the risk of electric
  conduction. The doors and corridors are wide and high for easy movement. The ceilings are high
  enough for proper theatre ventilation.

  PHYSICAL LAYOUT THE OPERATING ROOM
  An operation theatre is the "heart" of any major hospital. An operating theatre, operating room,
  surgery suite or a surgery centre is a room within a hospital within which surgical and other
  operations are carried out.


                                                195
OT are designed and built to carry out investigative, diagnostic, therapeutic and palliative
procedures of varying degrees of invasiveness. Many such setups are customized to the
requirements based on size of hospital, patient turnover and may be speciality specific.
The aim is to provide the maximum benefit for maximum number of patients arriving to the
operation theatre. Both the present as well as future needs should be kept in mind while planning
OT.
OT design
Several basic design types are used in surgical services departments, depending on the age of
the facility and the physical design of the areas outside the department. All surgery departments
are designed with the idea of controlling traffic patterns and quickly providing each operating
room (OR) with the necessary supplies during and after each case, while keeping clean and
contaminated traffic patterns separate.
Most surgical suites are constructed according to a variation of one or more basic designs. The
basic designs are:
•     Central corridor plan – these plans are two types
•     Racetrack plan - In this design, the front entrance to each OR is from the outer corridor,
and supplies are retrieved through a rear entrance to the room leading to the central-core storage
and work areas.

•    Hotel plan - In this design, the ORs are situated along a central corridor, with separate clean
core and soiled work areas. The primary difference in this plan is that all traffic enters and exits
the surgery department through a single entrance or a primary entrance and holding area
entrance situated along the same corridor.

•    Peripheral corridor - In this design, the front entrance to each OR is from the peripheral
corridor, and supplies are retrieved through a rear entrance from the OR leading to the central-
core storage and work areas.

•    Specialty grouping plan - The "specialty grouping" plan is simply a variation on the hotel
or race track plan, in which ORs are grouped by specialty (e.g., neurosurgery, general surgery),
each with its own closely associated clean storage areas and, in some cases, each with its own
soiled instrument work area.
The design of any surgery department revolves around environmental control, traffic control,
and the desire to prevent surgical site infection (SSI). Such factors as the separation of clean and
soiled work areas and areas of the department specified as restricted and unrestricted assist in
the promotion of this idea. Efficiency is increased with strategic placement of computers,
preparation areas, and staff areas.
Different Zones/ Areas
Regardless of the design chosen by the facility, certain principles apply universally. Traffic
control follows predetermined traffic patterns that all persons entering the department are
expected to follow. The OR department is divided into four zones based on varying degrees of
                                              196
cleanliness, in which the bacteriological count progressively diminishes from the outer to the
inner zones (operating area) and is maintained by a differential decreasing positive pressure
ventilation gradient from the inner zone to the outer zone.
1. Unrestricted zone or clean area.
2. Semi restricted zone or sub sterile area
3. Restricted zone or sterile area
4. Disposal zone or area
1. Unrestricted/ Clean zone or clean area
•    This is the area where hospital personnel, OT personnel, patient's & their attendants can
move about in street clothes.
•    Connects protective zone to aseptic zone and has other areas also like
•    Stores & cleaner room
•    Equipment store room
•    Maintenance workshop
•    Kitchenette (pantry)
•    Firefighting device room
•    Emergency exits
•    Service room for staff
•    Close circuit TV control area
1. Semi restricted/ Protective zone or sub-sterile area
•    After changing from street clothes, with clean gown, cap & OT slipper, the OT team or
personnel are, enter in this area. (Operating room attire is required)
•    It includes -
•    Change rooms for all medical and paramedical staff with conveniences
•    Transfer bay for patient, material & equipment's
•    Rooms for administrative staff
•    Stores & records
•    Pre & post-operative rooms
•    I.C.U. and P.A.C.U.
•    Sterile stores
1. Restricted/Aseptic zone or sterile area:
•    This zone has operation theatres & operation room where operations are done.
•    This is a place where staff & patients in street clothes & shoes are not allowed to enter.
Scrubbed personnel wear sterile gowns & gloves & get ready for operation procedure.
(Operating room attire is required)
1. Disposal zone or area
•    Dirty utility area
•    Disposal corridor
•    OT attire mandatory in this area
Advantages of zoning
•    Minimizes risk of hospital infection.
                                            197
  •     Minimizes unproductive movement of staff, supplies & patient.
  •     Increases efficacy of operative team members.
  •     Ensures smooth workflow.
  •     Deceases hazards in operating room.
  •     Ensures proper positioning of equipment's.
  Sub areas
  •     Nurses station or counter - Nurses station is an area where nurses and other health care
  staff sit behind when not working directly with patients and can perform some of their duties.
  The station has a counter that can be approached by visitors and patients who wish to receive
  attention from the nurses. It should be spacious enough to allow two or more personnel to work
  together.
  •     Pre-operative check area (reception) - It is the area where OT nursing personnel receive
  patients. Here patients and his records are checked.
  •     Holding area - This area is planned for IV line insertion, preparation, catheter / gastric tube
  insertion, connection of monitors, & shall have O2 and suction lines. Facility for CPR should
  be available in this area.
  •     Induction/Anaesthetic room - It should have all facilities as in OT, but there is controversy
  as to its need. It should provide space for anaesthetic trolleys and equipment and should be
  located with direct access to circulation corridors and ready access to the operating room. It will
  also allow cleaning, testing and storing of anaesthesia equipment. It should have sufficient
  power outlets and medical gas panels for testing of equipment.




Figure 3: Operating theatre room,from internet




                                                 198
Adapted                       from                  the                     internet
https://www.google.com/url?sa=i&url=https%3A%2F%2Frajnursing.blogspot.com%2F2018
%2F09%2Fphysical-layout-operating

•     Post anaesthetic care units (PACU)/Post–operative or recovery room – Room where
patients are kept & cared until they are out of anaesthesia & until their vital signs become stable.
These should contain a medication station, hand washing station, nurse station, storage space
for stretchers, supplies and monitors / equipment and gas, suction outlets and ventilator.
•     Staff room – Men and women change dress from street cloth to OT attire; lockers and
lavatory are essential; rest room etc. are desirable.
•     Sanitary facility for staff- One washbasin and one western closet (WC) should be provided
for 8-10 persons. Showers and their number is a matter of local decision. Inclusion of toilet
facilities in changing rooms is not acceptable; they should be located in an adjacent space.
•     Offices – for staff nurse and anaesthesia staff- The office should allow access to both
unrestricted and semi-restricted areas as frequent communication with public is needed.
•     Rest rooms- Pleasant and quiet rest for staff should be arranged either as one large room
for all grades of staff or as separate rooms; both have merits. Comfortable chairs, one writing
table, a book case etc., may be arranged.
•     Laboratory – Small laboratory with refrigerator for pathologist to be arranged.
•     Seminar room- Since staff cannot leave an OT easily, it is better to have a seminar room
within the OT. Intra-departmental discussions, teaching and training sessions for staff (with
audio-visual aids) may be conducted here.
•     Store room-
•     These rooms should have steel cabinets & separate for specific items.
•     These cabinets should be spacious enough to accommodate various items such as sterile
linens, sterile trays, sterile drums with sponges, dressings, cotton swabs, bandages, sterile rubber
sheets, catheters, sutures, syringes, infusion & transfusion sets.
•     A separate store room is needed for unsterile, clean articles such as linen, OT dress items,
stainless steel equipment's
•     The cabinets of store rooms should be made up of such materials which can be cleaned &
washed without being damaged.
•     There should be bigger store room for equipment's such as monitoring devices, suction
apparatus, O2 cylinder, trolleys, wheel chairs, stretchers, defibrillator, pace makers, bed urinals,
OT slippers etc.
•     Scrub room- This is planned to be built within the restricted area. This should be spacious.
Sometime s two or three operation theatres can share one scrub facility. Scrub area should have
deep & wide shink to avoid splash of water on the surrounding area. There should be facilities
for running water. The taps should be such that they could be opened or closed by foot pedals
or they have long handles that can be operate by elbows.
•     Waiting room – Patient's attendants or family member's waiting room with attached toilet
& drinking water facility.
                                              199
•    Visitor's gallery - Gallery from where the visitors can see the operative procedures being
performed.
•    Utility Room - This is also called clean up room where instruments, articles, gloves are
received following surgical procedures. Here all these are cleaned, washed & wiped dry & then
wrapped, stored & sent for sterilization.
•    Disposal or sluice room - This room receives all soiled linen & dressing. Here all disposable
items are separated according to biochemical waste management code & then packed in leak
proof containers. The soiled linens are sent to the laundry. The OT set up should be such that it
should be possible to dispose off soiled items without taking them through sub-sterile or sterile
areas.
OPERATING ROOM
NUMBER & SIZE
•    The number & size can be as per the requirement.
•    The standard OT should be rectangular or square in shape and similar in design.
•    It should be 20×20×10 feet in size so it provides a floor space of 400 Sq. feet approx.
•    It should be spacious enough to allow free movement of personnel, trolleys, stretchers,
wheel chairs, monitoring devices, portable x-ray machines etc.
•    Cardiac or neurosurgery OT should be bigger in size of 20x30x10 feet with 600 sq. feet
floor space.
•    OT for endoscopy or minor surgery can be of small size of 18x18x10 feet with a floor space
of 324 sq. feet.
DOORS
•    Main door to the OT suite has to be of adequate width (1.2 to 1.5 m).
•    The doors of each OT should be spring loaded flap type, but sliding doors are preferred as
no air currents are generated.
•    All fittings in OT should be flush type and made of steel.
SURFACE / FLOORING
•    The surface / flooring must be slip resistant, strong with minimum joints.
•    It should be easily washable, free as possible joints, seams so that they do not permits
adherence of bacteria or dust particles containing microorganism.
•    It should be able to withstand repeated washing with germicidal agents.
•    It should be able to absorb sound.
•    The colour of the flooring should be such that if a needle is dropped on the floor it is visible.
WALLS
•    The walls, ceiling & floor surfaces should be made of hard fire resistant, smooth, non-
porous material.
•    It should be light in colour (light blue or green) and washable paint should be ideal.
•    Colour of paint should allow reflection of light and yet soothing to eyes.
•    Adequate electric points should be available on the wall at < 1.5 m height from the floor.
SCRUB STATION
•    For sterile hand wash
                                               200
•    Types: Stainless/ Granite/Marble/ Cement
•    Gradient of basin forward and downwards
•    Gradient towards outlet
•    Hot water mixing: automatic or manual
•    Non splashing taps; possible to change direction
•    Elbow/ Foot or Infra-Red operated taps
•    Soap dispenser: Manual/automatic
•    to be planned for at least for 2-3 persons in each OT.


VENTILATION, TEMPERATURE & HUMIDITY
•     The OT Require Efficient ventilation that will control temperature and humidity in OT and
dilute the contamination by microorganisms and anaesthetic agents.
•     The ventilation in OT should follow the principles that the direction of airflow should take
place from the sterile to the clean zone & form the clean zone to the less clean areas.
•     There should be no open window in the OT and sliding doors of the OT should be open
from the OT towards the sub sterile zone.
•     There should be no interchange air movement between one OT and another.
•     There should be no circulating fan or cross ventilation to prevent airborne contamination
of the surgical wound.
•     An effective ventilation system is necessary to exchange the air. This air is filtered with an
efficient air filtering system.
•     There are two types of air conditioning systems: recirculating and non recirculating.
•     The circulating system takes some or all of the air, adjusts the temperature and circulates
air back to the room.
•     Non-recirculating systems heat / cool the air as desired and convey it into the operating
room with ideally 20-air exchange per hour. Air is then exhausted to outside. Anaesthetic agents
in the OT air are also automatically removed. These are thus ideal but are expensive.
•     The broad recommendations include:
•     20-30 air exchanges / hour for recirculated air
•     Only up to 80% recirculation of air to prevent build-up of anaesthetic and other gases
•     Ultraclean laminar airflow – the filtered air delivery must be 90% efficient in removing
particles more than 0.5m m.
•     Positive air pressure system in OT: It should ensure a positive pressure of 5 cm H2O from
ceiling of OT downwards and outwards, to push out air from OT.
•     Relative humidity of 50-60% to be maintained
•     Temperature between 18o-24oC. Temperature should not be adjusted for the comfort of
OT personnel but for the requirement of patient, especially in paediatric, geriatric, burns,
neonatal cases etc.



                                              201
  LIGHTING
Figure 4 showing the diagram of surgical lights




  Adapted from the internet
  https://www.google.com/url?sa=i&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.surgicalledlights.com%2Fsale-
  11200111-5000k-220v-led-operation-theatre-lights-140000-lux-surgical-operating-light.

  The general room illumination the OT is provided by fluorescent lamps (surface ceiling
  mounted) to produce even illumination of at least 500 Lux at working height, with minimal glare
  are preferred.
  •     This contrast should be maintained in corridors and scrub areas, as well as in the room
  itself, so that the surgeon becomes accustomed to the light before entering the sterile field.
  •     To minimize eye fatigue, the ratio of intensity of general room lighting to that at the
  surgical site should not exceed 1:5, preferably 1:3.
  •     Colour and hue of the lights also should be consistent.
  •     The surgical or operation light should be an overhead ceiling mounted unit.
  •     The overhead operating light must:
  •     Overhead light should be near daylight in colour and shadow less and give25000-125000
  Lux of light (50000 to 100000 Lux at the centre and at least 15000 Lux at the periphery).


                                              202
•     Give contrast to the depth and relationship of all anatomic structures. The light may be
equipped with an intensity control mechanism. The surgeon may ask for more light when needed
therefore a reserve light should be available (e.g. a mobile operation light).
•     Provide the diameter light pattern of a focus appropriate for the size of the incision. These
are adjusted with controls mounted on the light fixture.
•     Be freely adjustable to any position or angle. Most overhead operating lights are ceiling
mounted on mobile fixtures. It can be positioned so that light is directed into a single incision
or two concurrent operative sites.
•     Be spark-proof where anaesthetic gases are used.
•     Produce minimum heat to prevent injury to exposed tissues, to ensure the comfort of the
sterile team, and to minimize airborne microorganisms.
•     Be easily cleaned. Tracks recessed within the ceiling virtually eliminate dust accumulation.
The radiant heat produced by the light should raise the tissue temperature not more than 2oC.
EMERGENCY SIGNAL
•     The OT management committee should consider installing an alarm system in case of a
life-threatening emergency.
•     The activation of this alarm will save valuable time to mobilize the emergency designate
staff and direct them to the site of the emergency.
OTHER FACILITIES OF OR
•     Electric generator - OT department should have electric generator to ensure uninterrupted
electricity supply in case of electricity failure.
•     O2 supply & suction system - OT should have piped in O2 supply through central O2
supply system from a central source. There should also be central suctioning through piped in
suction arrangement.
•     Music system - Operation theatre can also have a soft music system. Music creates a
pleasant environment for patients & staff. Music also provide diversion of the patient's mind.
Music can provide relaxation to pts who undergo surgery under local, regional or spinal
anaesthesia. It also provide a soothing atmosphere & decreases tension & fatigue of the OT staff.
•Computer terminal - The modern OT construction also provide a surface area for the computer
terminal in each OT. These computers are being used to record & maintain patient information.




Resource mobilization
What is Resource Mobilization and Why is it so Important?
What is resource mobilization in theatre?
Resource mobilization refers to all activities involved in securing new and additional resources
for your organization. It also involves making better use of, and maximizing, existing resources.
Resource mobilization is often referred to as ‘New Business Development’. The figure below

                                              203
shows how New Business Opportunities – which are intended to mobilize resources – form part
of an organization’s overall functioning.
Why is resource mobilization so important?
Resource mobilization is critical to any organization for the following reasons:
1. Ensures the continuation of your organization’s service provision to clients
2. Supports organizational sustainability
3. Allows for improvement and scale-up of products and services the organization currently
provides
4. Organizations, both in the public and private sector, must be in the business of generating
new business to stay in business
What is meant by sustainability?
Although sustainability is often identified with having sufficient funds to cover an organization’s
activities, it is actually a broader concept. There are three fundamental streams of sustainability:
institutional, financial and programmatic. Each is vital to the survival of an organization. Below
are the definitions of these three areas of sustainability:
Programmatic sustainability. The organization delivers products and services that respond to
clients’ needs and anticipates new areas of need. Its success enables expansion of its client base.
Institutional sustainability. The organization has a strong, yet flexible structure and accountable,
transparent governance practices. Its structure and good governance allows it to respond to the
shifting priorities of its supporters and to new responsibilities toward its clients, while creating
a positive work climate for its staff.
Financial sustainability. The organization draws on various sources of revenue, allowing it to
support its ongoing efforts and to undertake new initiatives.




Staffing Process
 Staffing involves hiring and retaining staff in an organisation.
The staffing process involves a situation analysis, looking into what you want and whom you
can get. It includes:
•     Recruitment
•     Selection
•     Induction
•     Scheduling
Recruitment
This is the first part of the process and it involves filling a vacancy. It includes the examination
of the vacancy and consideration of sources of suitable candidates. The sources could be
internal, that is, from within the organisation, or external.
                                              204
Selection
This is the next stage, it includes assessing the candidate by various means, for example,
interviewing and making a choice between candidates to be followed by an offer of employment.
If no suitable candidates are found, the post is advertised again with a wider scope or catchment
area. This may include advertising abroad.
During selection, at least the three best candidates are chosen.
In case the best candidate is not in a position to take the job, then the second best is approached
until the vacancy is filled.
Scheduling (Duty Roster)
Figure 5: Sample of duty roster




From                                                                     internet
https://www.google.com/url?sa=i&url=https%3A%2F%2Fsetupmyhotel.com%2Fformats%2F
fo%2F181-hotel-staff-duty-roster-chart

After the orientation is done, the employee is assigned tasks to be performed. Work schedules
and time off should meet organisational goals with fairness and equity among personnel. A
schedule should adhere to the following:


                                              205
•     Policies, standards and practices of the organisation on the hours worked by professional
and support staff.
•     Appropriate ratio or balance between professional and support staff.
•     Continuity of nursing services and twenty four hour coverage.
•     Approved budget.
•     Consideration of vacations.
•     Allowance of adjustment in case of illness, emergencies or changes in patient care needs.
•     Individual needs of staff.
Staff members should be informed of their work schedules at least one to two weeks in advance.
The schedules may be either centralised or decentralised.
A centralised schedule is controlled by the chief nurse, matron or a designate who develops a
master plan for nursing personnel in the hospital. One of the advantages of this method is that it
provides an overall picture of the staffing situation in the organisation. However, it denies the
manager the right to make scheduling decisions based on workers' abilities and needs. In the
decentralised schedule, the middle and lower levels of management determine scheduling, for
example, ward in charges. The manager is, therefore, more accountable at their level and has a
greater control of activities.
Factors Affecting Staffing
There are many variables that may affect staff numbers and placement.
These include:
The need to provide nursing services
•     Staff factors, for example, job descriptions, education level of staff, experience and
expectations from the organisation.
•     Patient factors, including variety of patient conditions, length of stay, the patient
population, care needs and fluctuation in numbers.
•     Health care organisation factors, including policies and procedures, financial resources
available, number of beds per unit, staffing norms, issues of professional coverage and nursing
assignment systems.
Since each setting is unique, there is no guide that can stipulate the correct number of personnel
needed to provide quality care. However, systems have been developed for guidance, for
example, the patient classification system which is a method of grouping patients according to
the amount and complexity of their nursing care requirements. In this case, patients are grouped
according to the nursing time, effort and ability required to provide care.

Organising
 Nurses work in organisations. Nurse managers are expected to organise their work activities
based on the staffing patterns. Organising is the process of grouping the necessary
responsibilities and activities into workable units, determining the lines of authority,
communication, developing patterns of coordination and giving feedback. By organising, you
are attempting to answer the question:
How will the work be divided and accomplished?
                                              206
To answer the question, the manager must define groups and assign duties. There are certain
basic issues to consider:
•     Set up structure, that is, the structured aspects of the organisation that must be set up to
indicate activities to be performed and lines of responsibility
and authority.
•     Develop procedures and policies.
•     Determine requirements and decide how duties will be performed.
Resource allocation
Financial Resource Management
In the previous section, you covered the management of human resources. In this part, you are
going to examine financial resource management. Managing finances is one of the most
important roles of a nurse manager. Arguments have been put forward that this function should
be left to accountants who are specialised in this area. However, if nurses do not have the basic
skills to enable them manage finances, they will not succeed in providing nursing services. Most
of the resources you will be managing are acquired with money.
Financial planning requires that the manager identifies objectives, policies and procedures. The
budget is one of the main tools of financial management.

Budgeting
In simple terms, budgeting involves managing money and how it is used to maintain other
resources.
A budget is a means of control, which reflects the plan against which actual performance is
measured. It can also be defined as a means of checking the progress made in keeping the
expenses and costs in compliance with an organisation's financial plans. Budgeting is the process
of planning and controlling future operations by comparing actual results with planned
budgetary expectations.
The following are some of the purposes of a budget:
•     To avoid spending more than an organisation can afford
•     To aid in planning and controlling
•     To assist in assessing the financial requirements of the institution
•     To indicate the areas in which money raised or received will be spent
•     To facilitate comparison of actual performance with budgeted targets
In order to draw up a meaningful budget, the hospital should have a clearly defined
organisational structure with responsibilities defined and assigned. Personnel at all levels of
management should participate in budget development. The personnel involved should have an
understanding of the ideas and financial goals of the hospital.
There must be an adequate system, which provides reliable financial and statistical information
to the responsible people. The budget should allow enough freedom to accomplish departmental
objectives and must be flexible enough to allow for unpredictable expenditures.
There are two main types of budgets, which the nurse may be involved
in preparing:
                                              207
•     Operational or Annual Budget
•     Capital Budget
Operational or Annual Budget
This is the organisation's statement of expected revenue or income and expenses for the coming
year. It coincides with the fiscal year. The fiscal year is a specified twelve month period during
which the operational and financial performance of the organisation is measured. It usually
coincides with the calendar year, that is, it runs from January to December or may follow another
time frame, for example, the government calendar, which runs from July to June.
The operational budget includes the accumulated estimates of operating revenues and expenses.
In nursing management, the revenue is derived from patient fees. Actual payment is generated
by a given service or procedure.
The expenses consist of salary and non salary items, for example, personnel emoluments and
education, including in service training, on the job training, educational leave and travel
scholarships. They may also include personnel uniforms, books, periodical subscriptions,
laundry, medical equipment and maintenance, drugs and pharmaceuticals, non pharmaceutical
supplies, legal and professional fees and stationery.
The expenses should be comprehensive and thorough. Budgets are prepared by the heads of each
ward or department in consultation with staff. Thereafter, the matron, chief nurse or director of
nursing services compiles the nursing division budget. In some cases, the director of nursing
services prepares a budget for the whole of the nursing division.
As you can see from the figure, the income and expenditure parts of the budget have the same
totals, that is, they balance. A budget that has a higher income than expenditure is said to show
a surplus while the one with a higher expenditure shows a deficit. If there is a deficit in the
budget, it means you have spent more money than you have. This may require you to borrow
money or be indebted to your suppliers.
 Capital Budget
This is the second type of budget. It outlines the need for major equipment or physical changes
in the organisation requiring large sums of money, for example, physical renovations, new
construction and new or replacement equipment. Organisations define capital items based on
certain criteria, for instance, the item must have an expected performance of a minimum of one
year or more and exceed a certain shilling value, for example, fifty thousand. The criteria vary
from one hospital to another.
Requests for capital items are usually made on a special form or letter, accompanied by a written
justification for the item. If there are a large number of items requested, a priority list should be
set.
Where possible, the period within which items are needed should
be specified. Capital costs should consider long
term goals and must complement the organisational objectives.
All nurse managers are involved in the budgeting process.
Preparation begins several months before the end of the fiscal year to allow time for careful
preparation. In a decentralised system, budget preparation has several steps:
                                               208
•     Review of policies, standards and objectives.
•     Top level management projections for the future and preparation of guidelines.
•     Middle level nurse managers prepare the annual budget.
•     The administrator of nursing services, finance director or manager reviews the budget.
•     Budget is accepted or modified.
•     Budget is implemented and regularly evaluated.
Capital Budget
As you can see from the figure, the income and expenditure parts of the budget have the same
totals, that is, they balance. A budget that has a higher income than expenditure is said to show
a surplus while the one with a higher expenditure shows a deficit. If there is a deficit in the
budget, it means you have spent more money than you have. This may require you to borrow
money or be indebted to your suppliers.
Managing Materials
So far you have managed human resources and money. The other resource that a manager is
concerned with in the organisation is the materials. Materials refer to drugs, supplies and
equipment needed by the nurses and other health personnel to deliver services.
For quality and efficient services, the materials must be provided at the right place, at the right
time and in the right quantity.
Materials are essential if the health care institution is to achieve its objectives. The nurse
manager should know the policies and procedures that relate to materials management. You
should be familiar with the following activities:
Demand Estimation
Since a large quantity of materials is used in hospitals, you need to identify your requirements
or needs beforehand.
Procurement
Having developed your list of requirements, the next step is procurement or ordering.
Some institutions have laid out specific rules and regulations regarding procurement. This is
aimed at reducing wastage and maximising the value of money.
Receipt and Inspection
The materials received should be subjected to either physical or chemical inspection. This
ensures that you received the right quality and quantity of materials as requested by the
organisation.
Inventory Control
Adequate quantities of materials should be available
whenever required. Close supervision of movement of materials or consumption rate is a good
tool for proper control.
Storage
The materials should be placed in a store within or near the institution. The store should be of
adequate size to accommodate all the different materials required, for example, fridges, shelves
and cupboards.

                                              209
The materials should also be stored in appropriate conditions, for example, temperature, light as
specified by the manufacturer.
It is, therefore, important that the nurse manager adopts the proper procedures for materials
management.
Managing Time
Time is an important resource although in many cases, it is not thought of as such. It is
sometimes referred to as one of the M’s of management and stands for moments. The other M’s
being money, manpower and materials. For example, you may recall times when you have
wished that a day had more than twenty four hours or that a week had more than seven days so
that you can accomplish the tasks you had set out to do. This often happens when you are not
managing time well.
The demands on time as a manager and a health care provider fall into three categories (Nduba
1999):
•      Tasks that have to be performed. These relate to key responsibilities, for example, clinical
or administrative duties.
•      Tasks that other people pressurise you into doing. Some of these are important and must
be done while others you do because you do not want to say no.
•      Tasks that you perform because you want to.
These are usually out of choice and include tasks that someone else could do just as well, for
example, attending a nurses' association meeting.
Time Waster
This is something that prevents a person from accomplishing a job or achieving a goal. Some of
the common time wasters include:
•      Interruptions such as telephone calls and drop in visitors.
•      Lack of clear cut goals, objectives and priorities.
•      Meetings both scheduled and unscheduled.
•      Lack of daily or weekly plans.
•      Lack of self discipline.
•      Failure to delegate.
•      Ineffective communication.
•      Inability to say no.
Principles of Time Management
The following are techniques that you can use to deal with time management constraints.
Goal Setting
The nurse manager sets both organisational and
personal goals. The goals are either short or long term and provide direction and vision for
actions as well as time frames in which activities will be accomplished.
Time Analysis
The manager should conduct a survey of how they spend a day. Reviewing the daily schedule
and keeping it accurate may demonstrate how time is used.
Priority Setting
                                              210
  The nurse manager identifies time frames for achievement of goals. The ’to do’ list should be
  prioritised by classifying activities as ’one’ for urgent, ’two’ for not urgent but important and
  ’three’ for less important.
  Delegation
  The nurse manager can delegate those activities that can be effectively handled by juniors.
  Controlling Interruptions
  The nurse manager should identify causes of interruption and plan to reduce them. One way of
  doing this is incorporating some of these interruptions into planned and scheduled activities.
  Nurse managers must use time wisely to accomplish everything that is expected of them. This
  takes a lot of planning.
  By now you should be able to manage resources within the organisation. However, in the current
  health care system, there are a lot of changes including social, technological and educational,
  which a nurse manager should be able to respond to and manage. According to the theory of
  evolution, plants and animals have survived countless changes in the
  earth's environment. For example, the cockroach has been around for three hundred million
  years and the shark two hundred million years. This is because they have learnt how to adapt to
  their environment.They have learnt how to survive. The strong survive and the weak die, it is
  survival for the fittest.
  Change has always been, and will always be, a part of us. During your lifetime you must have
  experienced change in one form or the other, such as moving from one workstation to another,
  acquisition of new skills or introduction of new methods of nursing care delivery.
  Change is the process of making something different from what it was. Change is inevitable and
  nurse managers should understand and anticipate the reactions to change.

Figure 6: Organization structure/protocol Organizational Chart for Division




                                               211
Figure 7: advantages of grouping OT as a management system



  Communication methods
  Organisational Communication
  In units one and two of module one, you covered the various principles of communication.
  Please refer to your notes on this topic, as they will be useful for the following topic. In this
  section, you will specifically focus on organisational communication. There is no organisation
  that can exist without communication.
  Communication is referred to as the lifeblood of any organisation. Communication refers to the
  need to create
  common understanding. It is, therefore, the process of transmitting ideas and information from
  one person, the sender, to another or group of people, receivers.
  Organisational communication is the exchange of information withinthe organisation. While
  employee communication is the responsibility of the manager, the manager’s work may be
  supplemented through some already established means of communication within an
  organisation.
  The manager is charged with the responsibility of passing information through various channels.
Figure 8: Showing communication channels




                                               212
Formal and Informal Communication
The formal communication system is mainly used. It is based on a chain of command from the
top of the organisation to the bottom. This is used for all official messages including directives,
procedures, policies, job instructions and so on. An informal communication system can also be
used. This is usually oral and not crucial to the functioning of the organisation.
It originates from informal groupings, for example, associations or
welfare groups. In most cases, messages are transmitted through the ‘grapevine’ (also known as
rumours) and sometimes the communication is distorted or groundless. Such types of
communication can cause fear and anxiety among staff and the manager should be aware of its
existence and reinforce stability using more formal methods of communication.
You will now look at some of the different types of formal
organisational communication.
Vertical Flow
The manager is responsible for passing information through vertical channels of communication,
which includes both a downward and an upward flow of communication.
A two way exchange of information is essential in organisations and managers must ensure that
there is feedback at all levels.
 Downward Communication
Most information within organisations moves from the top downward, that is, from the top levels
of management to employees. This may be through face to face communication or written
materials, for example, memos or circulars.
The purpose of this form of communication is mainly to inform employees of their
responsibilities, commitment to the objectives of the organisation and any other relevant
information. Barriers to this form of communication may include:
•     The manager may withhold information
•     The employee may fail to understand the message
•     The employee may get information but this may not be relevant to
their needs




                                              213
Figure 9: Showing Upward Communication




 From the internet
 This is the flow of information from the bottom up or from the subordinates to the supervisor.
 Ideally information should pass freely up the chain of command so that management gets the
 feedback needed to evaluate results and initiate improvements. Barriers to upward
 communication may include:
 •     If employees feel management is not interested in their ideas, they will not offer them.
 •     At times, bad news gets blocked and is not communicated to the top management.
 •     Delays in relaying messages.
 Ethics in PT
 Legal and Ethical Issues In perioperative theatre technology
 You will start by looking at the term ‘legal’. The dictionary defines the word legal as 'required’
 or 'permitted by law'. Therefore, when we talk of legal aspects in theatre technology, we are
 referring to what the law requires us to do in the theatre before, during and after the operation.
 In your clinical practice as a nurse, you may have participated in helping a patient who was to
 undergo an operation. Can you remember what preoperative care was required before the patient
 could go for the operation?
 Preoperative Care
 The preoperative care requirements are:
 1. You should make sure that the surgeon explains clearly to the patient what will happen to
 them.
 2. The surgeon should obtain an informed consent from the patient or parent/guardian/
 next of kin for those under age or not in a position to sign (e.g. unconscious person).
 3. The nurse ensures that the patient has signed an informed consent, after the surgeon has
 explained the advantages and outcomes of the operation.
 4. Make sure that the patient observes a ‘Nil by oral’ rule. The fasting should usually start six
 hours before the operation.
 5. Blood works: All should be within the acceptable ranges e.g. full Haemogram including
 HB, urea, electrolytes and creatinine.
 6.     The patient should be counselled and reassured especially those receiving operations such
 as amputation, ormastectomy.



                                               214
7.The site to be operated on should be shaved of hair and cleaned with warm soapy water, to
reduce the bacteria on the patient’s skin. The area shaved should be larger than the incision
site.
8.Catheterisation and IV branula insertion may be necessary depending on the surgery.
9.Observations of vital signs, urine testing for sugars, proteins and acetone should be done.
10.The receiving area nurse should confirm that the above preoperative measures have been
taken by the ward nurse in order to allow the patient in theatre. Some of the preparations form
part of the legal requirements before surgery.
In unit one of this module you covered nursing ethics where the importance of confidentiality
in nursing practice was stressed. This is another legal requirement. In the definition of legal, the
term ‘permitted by law’ implies that you can only carry out patient care within what the law
permits you to do. Therefore, the law gives the patient seeking medical, surgical and nursing
care, rights under which they are to be managed.
The dictionary defines rights as any claim that is morally just or legally granted as allowable or
due to a person. This brings you to the term ‘legal rights of an individual during theatre nursing’.
When it is said that a person has the legal right to informed consent, what is meant is that they
must be given information regarding the type of operation to be performed, why it is necessary,
and its effects both bad and good, before being requested to sign the consent form for the
operation.
However, you must also be aware of the fact that not all patients are given all the information
regarding the type of operation they are to undergo. Before you give such information, you need
to take factors such as age and level of education into consideration.
No matter how impossible it is to communicate this information to a patient, it would be against
the law and their individual rights to ask them to sign the consent form for an operation when
they have not fully understood the implications.
It is on this basis that those below the legal age of adulthood (18 years in Kenya) are not legally
bound to sign the consent form. It is signed by the parents/guardians on their behalf. In the same
way, consent for the mentally ill is sought from their parents/guardians/relatives. It is also
important to note that consent for an operation should be obtained from the patient before they
are pre-medicated, as pre-medication drugs have the potential of affecting their reasoning
capacity, hence making consent signed not legally binding.
Having looked at confidentiality and informed consent, it is important to mention that the
custody and security of the patient before, during and after operation is vested in the theatre
team. It has already been implied earlier that by signing the consent form, the patient takes some
responsibility for the whole loss of life or part of their body. However, this does not take away
the responsibility of the theatre team to ensure the security of the patient's life during the
operation.
The legal aspect in theatre nursing involves the care of the patient from the time the patient is
accepted in theatre, until they are handed over back to the ward.
For these reasons, the following procedure should be adhered to:
1. Any patient going to theatre must be properly prepared preoperatively.
                                              215
2. The patient must sign an informed consent, obtained by the surgeon.
3. The patient must be protected from any harm, falls or eventuality,
during the stay in theatre.
4. Confidentiality must be observed regarding the patient.
5. Measures must be taken to ensure that the patient taken to theatre is the right one for the
intended operation.
6. The items to be used for the operation must be counted and recorded before and after
operation to prevent loss of swabs, tubes, blades, forceps, abdominal pacts and any instrument
used.
7. Theatre technician must know where the exits are, for use in case of an emergency.
 8. Sockets in theatre should be covered during scrubbing to prevent risk of conducting
currents. They should also be one meter or more above the floor level.
9. All electrical machines must be checked to ascertain optimum function before use on the
patient.
Ethical Issues
Ethics have always been an integral part of perioperative theatre technology . Throughout your
practice you have applied the nursing code of ethics. The ethics provide the standards for
professional behaviour in terms of what is expected of theatre technician. They are based on the
principles of what is right or wrong. The nurses’ code of ethics serves as a self regulatory
mechanism and a source of guidelines for individual behaviour and responsibility.
As mentioned earlier, the nurse manager plays a significant role to ensure that the law and ethics
are applied appropriately in theatre technician practice. The following are some of the roles and
functions expected of them:
•     Serves as a role model by providing care that meets and exceeds accepted standard of care.
•     Ensures that their conduct is as per the perioperative theatre technology code of ethics.
•     Makes sure that their staff confine themselves to the scope of nursing practice according
to registration, licensure and enrolment.
•     Delegates to subordinates wisely.
•     Provides educational and training opportunities for staff on legal issues.
•     Is aware and makes staff aware about their own values and basic beliefs about the rights of
human beings.
•     Advocates for clients, subordinates and the profession.

Written assesment
Short answer responses
1.explain the proper theartre layout
2. discuss different communication channels
3.list all the resources found in theartre
5.outline the time management in thertre
6.explain staff recruitment process
Practical task
                                              216
  Develop aduty roster for five perioperative theartre tecnicians
  Materials
  Paper
  Pen
  Ruler
  Pencil
  names
  References
  Louis A. Allen, Management and Organization, McGraw-Hill Kogakusha, Ltd.
  Figure                                         1                                    layout:
  https://www.google.com/url?sa=i&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.researchgate.net%2Ffig
  ure%2FFirst-case-modified-OT-layout
  Figure 2 operating room
  https://www.google.com/url?sa=i&url=https%3A%2F%2Frajnursing.blogspot.com%2F2018%
  2F09%2Fphysical-layout-operating-
  figure 3 operating room lighting
  https://www.google.com/url?sa=i&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.surgicalledlights.com%2Fsale-
  11200111-5000k-220v-led-operation-theatre-lights-140000-lux-surgical-operating-light.
  Figure 4 duty roster
  https://www.google.com/url?sa=i&url=https%3A%2F%2Fsetupmyhotel.com%2Fformats%2F
  fo%2F181-hotel-staff-duty-roster-chart




  Learning outcome 3: Direct Operation Theatre resources
     1.2.2 Introduction to the learning outcome
  This unit describes the competencies required direct operation theatre resources. This learning
  outcome involves, Interpersonal skills, employment Act,work place policies,law and Labour
  regulations and Leadership skills
  1.2.3 Performance Standard
3.1 PT activities are supervised in accordance to Standard Management Procedures and work
    place policy
3.2 PT staffs are motivated in work as per the labour laws and work place policy
3.3 Guidelines in PT are given according to Standard Management Procedures, WHO and work
    place policy
  Definition of key terms
  Interpersonal skills -are the skills we use every day when we communicate and interact with
  other people, both individually and in groups.



                                              217
Conflict- is serious disagreement and argument about something important. If two people or
groups are in conflict, they have had a serious disagreement or argument and have not yet
reached agreement
Content/procedures/methods/illustrations
Interpersonal skills
What are interpersonal skills, and why are they important in the workplace? Interpersonal skills,
also known as people skills, soft skills, or emotional intelligence, are related to the way you
communicate and interact with others.
When employers are hiring, interpersonal skills are one of the top criteria used to evaluate
candidates. Regardless of the type of job you have, it’s important to be able to get along well
with coworkers, managers, customers, and vendors.
Strong interpersonal skills are essential for succeeding in today’s workplace.
What Are Interpersonal Skills?
Interpersonal skills are sometimes called employability skills. The word “employability” is a
tip-off about the importance of interpersonal skills: they’re so crucial that hiring managers really
don’t want to hire candidates without them.
Many careers require consistent, if not constant, interaction with other people. This is true even
for jobs that would seem to favor introverted personalities and independent work styles. For
example, even if you’re a software engineer, writer, or statistician, you still need to be able to
communicate and collaborate with your team.
It’s important to emphasize your interpersonal skills in your cover letter and resume, and then
back up those claims with your behavior during job interviews.
Even if you excel at the technical aspects of your job, employers won’t want to hire you if it
seems like you’d be a disaster to work with.
Types of Interpersonal Skills
Communication
One of the most important interpersonal skills in any job is communication. Whether you work
in IT, customer service, construction, or any other industry, you will need to be able to
communicate clearly and effectively with others both verbally and in writing. Some jobs also
require skills in effective public speaking.
•     Nonverbal communication
•     Public speaking
•     Verbal communication
Conflict Management
Whether you are a manager or an employee, you will likely need to resolve conflicts at some
point in your job. This might involve solving an issue between two staff members, between
yourself and a colleague, or between a client and your company. You will need to be able to
listen fairly to both sides and use creative problem solving to arrive at a solution.
•     Conflict resolution
•     Constructive criticism
•     Counseling
                                              218
•     Mediating
•     Problem solving
Empathy
Part of being a good manager, employee, or colleague is the ability to understand and show
empathy for others. If a customer or colleague calls with a complaint, for example, you will
need to listen thoughtfully to the person’s concerns and express compassion for their issue.
Empathy is an important skill that will help you get along with everyone in the workplace.
Caring,compassion,diplomacy,diversity,helping others, kindness,patience,respect,sensitivity
and Sympathy
Leadership
Even if you are not a manager, it is important to have some leadership experience and ability.
Leadership requires being able to motivate and encourage others and help a team achieve
success.
Listening
Listening is a skill that goes hand in hand with good communication. While you need to be able
to express your own ideas, you also need to thoughtfully listen to the ideas of others. This will
help your clients, employers, colleagues, and employees feel respected and valued.
•     Active listening
•     Curiosity
•     Focus
•     Inquiry
Negotiation
Negotiation is an important skill for many positions. Depending on the specific job, it might
involve creating formal agreements (or contracts) between clients or helping colleagues solve a
problem and determine a solution. To be a good negotiator, you must be able to listen to others,
use creative problem solving, and arrive at an outcome that satisfies everyone.
•     Negotiating
•     Persuasion
•     Research
Positive Attitude
Employers want to hire employees who make the office a brighter place. They want people with
a friendly, positive demeanor. This doesn’t mean you have to be the most social person in the
office, but you must be willing to develop some sort of a positive rapport with your colleagues.
•     Behavioural skills
•     Developing rapport
•     Friendliness
•     Humour
•     Networking
•     Social skills
Teamwork

                                             219
Even if your job involves a lot of independent work, you still need to be able to collaborate with
others. Teamwork involves several of the skills already mentioned: you need to be able to listen
to others, communicate your own goals, motivate your team, and resolve any conflicts that may
arise.
•     Collaboration
•     Group facilitating
•     Team building
•     Teamwork
Work place policies
Workplace Policies and Procedures Checklist
Explore this page
•     What is a workplace policy?
•     Benefits of having workplace policies
•     Developing and introducing workplace policies
•     Policy checklist
•     Types of workplace policies
What is a workplace policy?
A policy is a statement which underpins how human resource management issues will be dealt
with in an organisation. It communicates an organisation’s values and the organisation’s
expectations of employee behaviours and performance.
Workplace policies often reinforce and clarify standard operating procedure in a workplace.
Well written policies help employers manage staff more effectively by clearly defining
acceptable and unacceptable behaviour in the workplace, and set out the implications of not
complying with those policies.
A workplace policy consists of a statement of purpose and one or more broad guidelines on
action to be taken to achieve that purpose. The statement of purpose should be written in simple
terms, free of jargon. The length of the policy may vary depending on the issue it addresses.
A policy may allow discretion in its implementation and the basis of that discretion should be
stated as part of the policy. A policy may also be required where there is a diversity of interests
and preferences, which could result in vague and conflicting objectives among those who are
directly involved.
Not all workplace issues require a policy. Many routine matters can be dealt with through simple
workplace procedures and processes being put in place.
Benefits of having workplace policies
Well-written workplace policies:
•     are consistent with the values of the organisation
•     comply with employment and other associated legislation
•     demonstrate that the organisation is being operated in an efficient and businesslike manner
•     ensure uniformity and consistency in decision-making and operational procedures
•     add strength to the position of staff when possible legal actions arise

                                              220
•     save time when a new problem can be handled quickly and effectively through an existing
policy
•     foster stability and continuity
•     maintain the direction of the organisation even during periods of change
•     provide the framework for business planning
•     assist in assessing performance and establishing accountability
•     clarify functions and responsibilities.
Developing and introducing workplace policies
Step 1 – Management Support
It is crucial to have senior management support for the implementation or modification of a
policy, especially where policies relate to employee behaviour. The endorsement and modelling
of the behaviour by senior managers and supervisors will encourage staff to take the policies
seriously. While management support for a policy is an important first step before actively
seeking employee feedback on a proposed policy, the idea for the policy and some of its details
may in fact come from staff.
Step 2 - Consult with staff
Involve staff in developing and implementing workplace policies to promote stronger
awareness, understanding and ownership of the outcome. Staff involvement also helps to
determine how and when the policies might apply, and can assist in identifying possible
unintentional outcomes of the policy.
Step 3 - Define the terms of the policy
Be explicit. Define key terms used in the policy at the beginning so that employees understand
what is meant. The policy should explain what is acceptable and unacceptable behaviour in the
workplace. You may wish to include specific examples to illustrate problem areas or
unacceptable types of behaviours. For example:
An individual shall be deemed to be under the influence of alcohol if he/she exceeds a blood
alcohol level of 0.05% (0.02% for heavy vehicle drivers).
Be clear about who the policy applies to. For example, does it only apply to employees of the
company or to contractors and sub-contractors engaged to perform work on business premises?
This is particularly important, for example, with occupational health and safety which covers
everyone in the workplace.
The policy may also need to contain information about what to do if it is not possible to follow
the policy. For example, if you have a policy relating to punctuality, you may need to include a
procedure outlining what to do if the employee is going to be late.
The policy should also contain procedures to support the policy in its operation, such as the
implications for not complying with the policy.
Example 1: Occupational health and safety
No employee is to commence work, or return to work while under the influence of alcohol or
drugs. A breach of this policy is grounds for disciplinary action, up to and including termination
of employment.
Example 2: Email policy
                                              221
Using the organisation's computer resources to seek out, access or send any material of an
offensive, obscene or defamatory nature is prohibited and may result in disciplinary action.
Step 4 - Put the policies in writing and publicise them
To be effective, policies need to be publicised and provided to all existing and new employees.
This includes casual, part-time and full-time employees and those on maternity leave or career
breaks.
Policies should be written in plain English and easily understood by all employees. Consider
translating the policies into the appropriate languages for employees whose first language is not
English.
Ensure all staff understand what the policies mean. Explain how to comply with the policies and
the implications of not complying.
Step 5 - Training and regular referral
The policies may be explained to staff through information and/or training sessions, at staff
meetings and during induction sessions for new staff. They should also be reiterated and
discussed with staff regularly at staff meetings to ensure they remain relevant.
Copies of policies should be easily accessible. Copies may be kept in folders in a central location
or staff areas, in staff manuals and available on the organisation's intranet system.
Step 6 – Implementation
It is important that policies are applied consistently throughout the organisation. A breach of a
policy should be dealt with promptly and according to the procedures set out in the policy. The
consequence of the breach should also suit the severity of the breach – whether it be a warning,
disciplinary action or dismissal.
Step 7 - Evaluate and review
Review policies regularly to ensure they are current and in line with any changes within the
organisation. Where policies are significantly changed they should be re-issued to all staff and
the changes explained to them to ensure they understand the organisation's new directions. These
changes should also be widely publicised.
Policy checklist
A workplace policy should:
•      set out the aim of the policy
•      explain why the policy was developed
•      list who the policy applies to
•      set out what is acceptable or unacceptable behaviour
•      set out the consequences of not complying with the policy
•      provide a date when the policy was developed or updated.
Types of workplace policies
Here are some examples of common workplace policies that could assist your workplace:
•      code of conduct
•      recruitment policy
•      internet and email policy
•      mobile phone policy
                                              222
•   non-smoking policy
•   drug and alcohol policy
•   health and safety policy
•   anti-discrimination and harassment policy
•   grievance handling policy
•   discipline and termination policy
•   using social media

Law and Labour regulations
Labour Management Relations
Labour management relations has been defined as ‘the effort to develop harmonious working
relations between employees and management in order for a firm to increase productivity,
improve quality of work life and remain competitive’.
Objectives of Labour Management Relations
• To enhance a healthy relationship between employers and employees, that is, a sound,
harmonious and mutually beneficial relationship.
• To safeguard the interests of employees and management by securing mutual understanding
and goodwill between them.
• To avoid industrial and workplace conflict that could affect production and productivity.
• To preventing or reduce labour turnover and frequent absenteeism.
• To nurture and sustain workplace democracy in order to enhance employee participation in
decision making and problem solving.
• To eliminate strikes, lockouts and go slows.
• To allow the government some control over private means of production, distribution and
service provision in the public intere
• The management should never be caught up in a surprise strike if they have been in good
relations and communication with the employees. Those in Management positions should not
be members of trade unions.
Other Laws Related to Nursing Practice
The following are some of the laws that are relevant to nursing practitioner
The Public Health Act (cap 242)
This Act is commonly referred to as the mother Act among the Acts of Health Professionals.
It describes the health delivery services in the country.
Pharmacy and Poisons Act (Cap 244)
You should be familiar with this law because of drug prescription and administration.
Medical Practitioners and Dentists Act Cap (253)
In your community health nursing practice or private nurse practice you will be expected to
diagnose and treat minor ailments, this encroaches on this law.
 Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (Control) Act 1994
While dealing with the dangerous drugs, you will be required to be familiar with this law.
This also applies to dealing with drug misuse and abuse.
                                          223
Mental Health Act Cap (248)
You have been exposed to mental health and psychiatric nursing.
You will interact with such patients in your practice as a general nurse, midwife and community
health nurse.

Other Laws Related to Nursing Practice
Medical Laboratory Technicians and Technologists Act (1999)
You will be taking body specimens from patients and clients.
You should therefore be familiar with this law.
Clinical Medicine Act
This law is related to the medical Practitioners and Dentists Act because of diagnosing and
treating minor ailments.
 Food, Drugs and Chemicals Act
You will be dealing with the nutritional status of the patient. In addition, you are one of the food
handlers in the hospital. Familiarise yourself with the law.
 Children and Young Persons Act
In your practice you will be interacting with babies, children, adolescents and teenagers. This
may be in wards, departments, clinics, maternity, school health and the community. Remember
children have rights which you must recognise.
You may be the provider of the health services, advocate or advisor of other health professionals
in your multidisciplinary teams. You may have heard of the African Charter on the Rights and
Welfare of the Child which was adapted by the 26th ordinary session of the Assembly of Heads
of State and Government of the OAU, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia - July 1990.
Leadership skills
Honesty and integrity
When it comes to leadership, honesty is about being transparent and open. You need to be
willing to communicate your thoughts and feelings, even if what you're saying is unpopular or
uncomfortable. It also means keeping your word as well as following through on any promises
you make.
Integrity, on the other hand, goes hand in hand with work ethic and having a good work ethic
sets an example. If you always make the effort to make the best possible decisions both in the
interest of your company and your staff, employees will look at you as a leader with integrity.
Improve your leadership skills in our immersive course. Click here to learn more.
Problem solving
A lot of people believe that problem solving is fixing an error irrespective of the cost. In actual
fact, many leaders will tell you that a problem could end up being an opportunity, and effective
problem solving is about embracing that fact. It's also about avoiding finger-pointing at all costs;
if a problem emerges, it's vital that you don't get caught up trying to blame someone. It's
unproductive, wastes time and doesn't solve the issue.

                                              224
Instead, it's important to look at things in an analytical way. Collecting data is always an
effective method when it comes to getting through problems. It avoids having to rely on
guesswork and will help you to ensure the problem doesn't happen again. Above all else, it's
important that a manager stays positive during a problem. Reacting negatively will impact
morale and create panic.
Delegate work to team members' strengths
Recognising your team members' strengths will help create a positive workplace environment
and ensure tasks get completed in a timely manner. If possible, carry out either a formal or
informal strengths assessment. You can assess the strengths of a team member through
observation or even through an interview. Alternatively, you can use a more formal method such
as a strength-based questionnaire.
Communicate powerfully and prolifically
Perhaps the most important aspect of being a leader is communication. You can be incredibly
innovative and technically gifted but if you lack the skills in order to effectively communicate
your ideas and methods, they will struggle to get off the ground.
You can practice your communication skills in realistic VR experiences.
Essentially, powerful communication will help you to influence as well as inspire your team. In
order to do that, there are three tools you will need to master:
•     Active listening
•     Creative questioning
•     Responding influentially
Active listening will give you a greater understanding and awareness of any given situation, and
the same can be said for creative questioning. Responding in an influential way will help you to
convey effective words and messages which will inspire your team.
It can take time, and linking listening, questioning and messaging requires delicate and careful
skills. Once you get it right, however, your conversations will be infinitely more constructive
and will lead to more successful meetings.
Collaborate and promote teamwork
Promoting teamwork wherever possible will help your team work more cohesively towards the
company's vision. A good way to achieve teamwork is through meetings and assigning tasks
that require your team to communicate with each other as well as form trust and be able to
support each other.
Once the task has been completed, team members will have added respect for each other and
value other members' roles. It may also work if you provide incentives or rewards for fulfilling
the tasks as this could help to motivate them even more.

Written test
Short response assessment
 1. List all interpersonal skills
 2. Explain the conflict resolution mechanisms
 3. Outline factors that promote teamwork at working station
                                             225
  Reference
  Louis A. Allen, Management and Organization, McGraw-Hill Kogakusha, Ltd.
  Louis A. Allen, Management and Organization, McGraw-Hill Kogakusha, Ltd.
  Jit S. Chandan, Organizational Behaviour, Vikas Publishing House.
  Fred Luthans, Organizational Behaviour, McGraw-Hill.
  Stephens P. Robbins,” Organizational Behaviour”, Prentice-Hall India.
  Laurie J. Mullins,” Management and Organizational Behaviour”, Pitman.

  Learning outcome 4: Control Perioperation Theatre resources
     1.2.2 Introduction to the learning outcome
  This unit describes the competencies required to control perioperation Theatre resources. This
  learning outcome involves, Resource management ,Medical legal aspects in Perioperation
  Theatre ,Creative and Critical thinking,Basic monitoring and evaluation,Observation
  skills,Interviewing skills and Investigative skills in Theatre.
  1.2.3 Performance Standard
4.1 Objectives for PT activities are set as per work place policy
4.2 Standard performance in PT is established as per Standard Management Procedures, WHO
    and work place policy
4.3 Tools for standard performance are developed as per workplace policy.
4.4 Performance indicators are identified as per set objectives.
4.5 Baseline performance is identified and documented as per workplace policy
4.6 Targeted performance is set and documented as per Workplace policy.
4.7 Evaluation of performance is carried out as per workplace policy
  Progress reports are prepared as per workplace policy.

  Resource management
  Management is the skillful handling or is the skillful handling or treatment of a task. treatment
  of a task.
  Resource management is the skillful handling is the skillful handling of resources.
  Resource is anything that can be used to is anything that can be used to assist in the performance
  of a task
  Types of resource:
   1. Human Resource ; energy, time, skill, knowledge. , energy, time, skill, knowledge.
   2. Money, Money, used to buy other resources e.g. food equipment used to buy other
        resources e.g. food equipment
   3. Commodities, Commodities, food, equipment, fabric, wood, fuel, food, equipment,
        fabric, wood, fuel, electricity, cleaning agent. electricity, cleaning agent.
   4. Community resources Community resources, libraries schools, hospitals.
  Legal Aspects in Theatre Nursing
  You will start by looking at the term ‘legal’. The dictionary defines the word legal as 'required’
  or 'permitted by law'. Therefore, when we talk of legal aspects in theatre nursing, we are referring
                                                226
to what the law requires us to do in the theatre before, during and after the operation. In your
clinical practice as a nurse, you may have participated in nursing a patient who was to undergo
an operation. Can you remember what preoperative care was required before the patient could
go for the operation.
Preoperative Care
The preoperative care requirements are: You should make sure that the surgeon
explains clearly to the patient what will happen to them.
The surgeon should obtain an informed consent from the patient or parent/guardian/
next of kin for those under age or not in a position to sign (e.g. unconscious person).
The nurse ensures that the patient has signed an informed consent, after the surgeon has
explained the advantages and outcomes of the operation.
1.Make sure that the patient observes a ‘Nil by oral’ rule. The fasting should usually start six
hours before the operation.
2.Blood works: All should be within the acceptable ranges e.g. full Haemogram including HB,
urea, electrolytes and creatinine.
3.The patient should be counselled and reassured especially those receiving operations such as
amputation, ormastectomy.
4.The site to be operated on should be shaved of hair and cleaned with warm soapy water, to
reduce the bacteria on the patient’s skin. The area shaved should be larger than the incision site.
5.Catheterisation and IV branula insertion may be necessary depending on the surgery.
6.Observations of vital signs, urine testing for sugars, proteins and acetone should be done.
7.The receiving area nurse should confirm that the above preoperative measures have been taken
by the ward nurse in order to allow the patient in theatre.
Some of the preparations form part of the legal requirements before surgery.
In unit one of this module you covered nursing ethics where the importance of confidentiality
in nursing practice was stressed. This is another legal requirement. In the definition of legal, the
term ‘permitted by law’ implies that you can only carry out patient care within what the law
permits you to do. Therefore, the law gives the patient seeking medical, surgical and nursing
care, rights under which they are to be managed.
The dictionary defines rights as any claim that is morally just or legally granted as allowable or
due to a person. This brings you to the term ‘legal rights of an individual during theatre nursing’.
When it is said that a person has the legal right to informed consent, what is meant is that they
must be given information regarding the type of operation to be performed, why it is necessary,
and its effects both bad and good, before being requested to sign the consent form for the
operation.
However, you must also be aware of the fact that not all patients are given all the information
regarding the type of operation they are to undergo. Before you give such information, you need
to take factors such as age and level of education into consideration.
No matter how impossible it is to communicate this information to a patient, it would be against
the law and their individual rights to ask them to sign the consent form for an operation when
they have not fully understood the implications.
                                              227
It is on this basis that those below the legal age of adulthood (18 years in Kenya) are not legally
bound to sign the consent form. It is signed by the parents/guardians on their behalf. In the same
way, consent for the mentally ill is sought from their parents/guardians/relatives. It is also
important to note that consent for an operation should be obtained from the patient before they
are pre-medicated, as pre-medication drugs have the potential of affecting their reasoning
capacity, hence making consent signed not legally binding.
Having looked at confidentiality and informed consent, it is important to mention that the
custody and security of the patient before, during and after operation is vested in the theatre
team. It has already been implied earlier that by signing the consent form, the patient takes some
responsibility for the whole loss of life or part of their body. However, this does not take away
the responsibility of the theatre team to ensure the security of the patient's life during the
operation.
The legal aspect in theatre nursing involves the care of the patient from the time the patient is
accepted in theatre, until they are handed over back to the ward.
For these reasons, the following procedure should be adhered to:
1. Any patient going to theatre must be properly prepared preoperatively.
2. The patient must sign an informed consent, obtained by the surgeon.
3. The patient must be protected from any harm, falls or eventuality, during the stay in theatre.
4. Confidentiality must be observed regarding the patient.
5. Measures must be taken to ensure that the patient taken to theatre is the right one for the
intended operation.
6.The items to be used for the operation must be counted and recorded before and after operation
to prevent loss of swabs, tubes, blades, forceps, abdominal pacts and any instrument used.
7. Theatre nurses must know where the exits are, for use in case of an emergency.
8. Sockets in theatre should be covered during scrubbing to prevent risk of conducting
currents. They should also be one meter or more above the floor level.
9. All electrical machines must be checked to ascertain optimum function before use on the
patient.
Creative and Critical thinking
Critical thinking is applied by nurses in the process of solving problems of patients and decision-
making process with creativity to enhance the effect. It is an essential process for a safe, efficient
and skillful nursing intervention. Critical thinking according to Scriven and Paul is the mental
active process and subtle perception, analysis, synthesis and evaluation of information collected
or derived from observation, experience, reflection, reasoning or the communication leading to
conviction for action .
So, nurses must adopt positions that promote critical thinking and refine skills of critical
reasoning in order a meaningful assessment of both the previous and the new information and
decisions taken daily on hospitalization and use of limited resources, forces you to think and act
in cases where there are neither clear answers nor specific procedures and where opposing forces
transform decision making in a complex process.

                                               228
Critical thinking applies to nurses as they have diverse multifaceted knowledge to handle the
various situations encountered during their shifts still face constant changes in an environment
with constant stress of changing conditions and make important decisions using critical thinking
to collect and interpret information that are necessary for making a decision
Critical thinking, combined with creativity, refine the result as nurses can find specific solutions
to specific problems with creativity taking place where traditional interventions are not effective.
Even with creativity, nurses generate new ideas quickly, get flexible and natural, create original
solutions to problems, act independently and with confidence, even under pressure, and
demonstrate originality .
The aim of the study is to present the basic skills of critical thinking, to highlight critical thinking
as a essential skill for nursing education and a fundamental skill for decision making in nursing
practice. Moreover to indicate the positive effect and relation that critical thinking has on
professional outcomes.
Go to:
2. CRITICAL THINKING SKILLS
Nurses in their efforts to implement critical thinking should develop some methods as well as
cognitive skills required in analysis, problem solving and decision making (5). These skills
include critical analysis, introductory and concluding justification, valid conclusion,
distinguishing facts and opinions to assess the credibility of sources of information, clarification
of concepts, and recognition conditions .
Critical analysis is applied to a set of questions that relate to the event or concept for the
determination of important information and ideas and discarding the unnecessary ones. It is,
thus, a set of criteria to rationalize an idea where one must know all the questions but to use the
appropriate one in this case
The Socratic Method, where the question and the answer are sought, is a technique in which one
can investigate below the surface, recognize and examine the condition, look for the
consequences, investigate the multiple data views and distinguish between what one knows and
what he simply believes. This method should be implemented by nurses at the end of their shifts,
when reviewing patient history and progress, planning the nursing plan or discussing the
treatment of a patient with colleagues
The Inference and Concluding justification are two other critical thinking skills, where the
justification for inductive generalizations formed from a set of data and observations, which
when considered together, specific pieces of information constitute a special interpretation
In contrast, the justification is deduced from the general to the specific. According to this, nurse
starts from a conceptual framework–for example, the prioritization of needs by Maslow or a
context–evident and gives descriptive interpretation of the patient’s condition with respect to
this framework. So, the nurse who uses drawing needs categorizes information and defines the
problem of the patient based on eradication, nutrition or need protection.
In critical thinking, the nurses still distinguish claims based on facts, conclusions, judgments
and opinions. The assessment of the reliability of information is an important stage of critical


                                                229
thinking, where the nurse needs to confirm the accuracy of this information by checking other
evidence and informants .
Basic monitoring and evaluation
What is a Monitoring and Evaluation Plan?
A monitoring and evaluation (M&E) plan is a document that helps to track and assess the results
of the interventions throughout the life of a program. It is a living document that should be
referred to and updated on a regular basis. While the specifics of each program’s M&E plan will
look different, they should all follow the same basic structure and include the same key elements.
An M&E plan will include some documents that may have been created during the program
planning process, and some that will need to be created new. For example, elements such as the
logic model/logical framework, theory of change, and monitoring indicators may have already
been developed with input from key stakeholders and/or the program donor. The M&E plan
takes those documents and develops a further plan for their implementation.

Observation skills
Observation Skills: Definition and Examples
When you're applying for jobs, it's imperative that you adequately communicate your strengths
and highlight skills that are beneficial for the role you're seeking. Developing your observation
skills makes you a more effective communicator and employee, which is why many employers
look for candidates that possess this ability. In this article, we explain what observation skills
are, explore how you can improve them and utilize them in the workplace and provide ways to
highlight these skills during the application process.
What are observation skills?
Observation skills refer to the ability to use all five of your senses to recognize, analyze and
recall your surroundings. This practice is often associated with mindfulness because it
encourages you to be present and aware of the details of your daily life.
Observation skills are dependent on several other abilities and attributes, such as:
•     Communication
•     Emotional intelligence
•     Critical thinking
•     Attention to detail
•     Interviewing skills
Investigative skills Control your biases
Good investigators understand what their biases are and work to control them while in
investigation mode. Adopt the persona of a sports referee—the neutral arbitrator, without a stake
in the outcome. This is easer said than done. You work in organizations and your leadership will
have their own set of biases and perhaps even taboo topics. Yet a good investigator must adopt
and maintain that open and neutral stance.
2) Take great care in what you label a fact
How to defend your findings and recommendations? Have an impeccable foundation to base
your conclusions, rooted in a carefully constructed set of building blocks of evidence, each of
                                              230
which you can demonstrate is true. Avoid single-source information that cannot be collaborated
by a second source. Remember the derivation of the word ‘‘witness” (to see, hear or know by
personal presence and perception). I’m very interested when a witness says “I saw” or ‘”heard”
as opposed to “I think.”
3) Improve your interviewing skills
Often the most important evidence is the recollections of witnesses. Being able to gather the
information of witnesses is critically important. Only about ten percent of safety professionals
tell me they have had formal training in conducting an effective interview. Most learned to
interview by watching someone else do it – with no indication that the person they were
watching had any formal training or talent in this area. Effective, ethical interviews require both
science and art. Science gives you the basics of human behavioral principles that must underpin
the interview. The art comes only with practice.
4) Avoid moving prematurely to cause analysis
No root cause analysis tool will fill in gaps in the evidence. Keep the root cause tool and any
discussion about causes on hold until you and the investigation team agree you have gathered,
organized and assessed all available information and have a firm timeline of the incident. Only
then will the root cause methodology be effective in guiding you to identify all appropriate
causes.
5) Write more explicit recommendations
Often investigation teams lose their focus and just write something down addressing the causes
identified. Use a structured method of crafting your recommendations. Give them precision and
impact. One common structure is the SMART method— recommendations that are Specific,
Measurable, Achievable, Realistic and Timely. Rate recent recommendations to see how they
measure up to those criteria. I think you will be surprised.
Each of these five areas are totally within your control and do not require any particular support
from your organization. Used as a means of self- improvement you’ll develop a reputation for
the quality of your investigations.
Short answer responses
What are the attributes that enhance proper observation skills
references
Louis A. Allen, Management and Organization, McGraw-Hill Kogakusha, Ltd.
Louis A. Allen, Management and Organization, McGraw-Hill Kogakusha, Ltd.
 Jit S. Chandan, Organizational Behaviour, Vikas Publishing House.
Fred Luthans, Organizational Behaviour, McGraw-Hill.
Stephens P. Robbins,” Organizational Behaviour”, Prentice-Hall India.
Laurie J. Mullins,” Management and Organizational Behaviour”, Pitman.


                 141     Learning outcome 5: Document PT resources
1.2.2 Introduction to the learning outcome

                                              231
 This unit describes the competencies required to document PT resources. It involves Records
 keeping in PT and Inventories in Operation Theatre.
     1.2.3 Performance Standard
1. PT resources to be documented are identified in accordance to work place policy
2. Required recording materials are gathered according to work place policy and SOPs,
3. Recording is carried out as per workplace policy and SOPs
4. Inventory is stored as per work place policy and SOPs
5. Waste is disposed with due regard to environment protection regulations
 Inventory Control
 Adequate quantities of materials should be available whenever required. Close supervision of
 movement of materials or consumption rate is a good tool for proper control.
 Storage
 The materials should be placed in a store within or near the institution. The store should be of
 adequate size to accommodate all the different materials required, for example, fridges, shelves
 and cupboards.
 The materials should also be stored in appropriate conditions, for example, temperature, light as
 specified by the manufacturer.
 • It is, therefore, important that the nurse manager adopts the proper procedures for materials
 management
 Records keeping in PT

  perioperative theatre technician as professionals need to record their work on completion
  record is a permanent written document that communicates information relevant to a client’s
  health care management. It is a clinical, scientific, administrative and legal document relating
  to the care given to the individual, family or community.
  Purpose of records
  i. Provide data for planning and evaluation
 ii. Tools for communication between health workers, the family and other personnel
iii. Indicate plans for the future
iv.     Provide baseline data to estimate long-term changes related to patient care
 v. Provide opportunity for evaluation of services
vi.     Help in research for improvement of nursing
  Types of records
  Every organization keeps some records and likewise every department in the hospital has its
  records such as: 1. Patient’s clinical notes 2. Nurses’ notes i.e. records of nurses assessment and
  interventions and care 3. Records of admission and discharge 4. Records of equipment loss and
  replacement (inventory) 5. Records of personnel performance
  Inventories in Operation Theatre
  The objective of inventory management is to make appropriate decisions regarding the level of
  inventory. Any inventory system must specify when an order is to be placed and how many units
  to order. In practice there are a lot items involved and it is therefore not practical to model and

                                                232
  control each item with equal attention. Classification of inventory is thus necessary. Inventory
  plays a crucial role in the stock room of the operating theatre and contributes to the loss Garden
  City is currently experiencing. Investigation of Classification of inventory follows.

   Self-assessment
   SHORT ANSWER RESPONSES QUESTIONS
   1. Explain xy theory of Management
   2. State Staffing procedures/recruitment procedures
   3. Discus any three Communication methods
   4. Explain any 4 Ethical issues in operating theartre
   5. Explain any 10 examples of Interpersonal skills
   6. Describe six leadership skills
   7. State the 10 effective qualities of a team leader
   8. What Is the Importance of Studying Management Theories & Practice
   RESPONSES TO SHORT ANSWER RESPONSES
1. What is X-Y Theory of Management?
Douglas McGregor, an American social psychologist, proposed his famous X-Y theory in his
1960 book 'The Human Side of Enterprise'. Theory X and Theory Y are still referred to
commonly in the field of management and motivation, and whilst more recent studies have
questioned the rigidity of the model, McGregor’s X-Y Theory remains a valid basic principle
from which to develop positive management style and techniques. McGregor's XY Theory
remains central to organisational development, and to improving organisational culture.
McGregor's X-Y theory is a salutary and simple reminder of the natural rules for managing
people, which under the pressure of day-to-day business are all too easily forgotten. Theory X -
'Authoritarian Management' Style
Assumptions made under this theory:
The average person dislikes work and will avoid it if he/she can.
Therefore most people must be forced with the threat of punishment to work towards
organisational objectives.
The average person prefers to be directed; to avoid responsibility; is relatively unambitious, and
wants security above all else.
His ideas suggest that there are two fundamental approaches to managing people:
   Many managers tend toward Theory X and generally get poor results.
Enlightened managers use Theory Y, which produces better performance and results, and allows
people to grow and develop.
2. What is Z-Theory of Management?
Theory Z is often referred to as the 'Japanese' management style, which is essentially what it is.
Interestingly, Ouchi chose to name his model 'Theory Z', which apart from anything else tends to
give the impression that it's a Mcgregor idea.


                                               233
Theory Z essentially advocates a combination of all that's best about Theory Y and modern
Japanese management, which places a large amount of freedom and trust with workers, and
assumes that workers have a strong loyalty and interest in team-working and the organisation.
Theory Z also places more reliance on the attitude and responsibilities of the workers, whereas
Mcgregor's XY Theory is mainly focused on management and motivation from the manager's
and the organisation's perspective.

3. State Staffing procedures/recruitment procedures
   1. Manpower Planning
   2. Employment of Personnel
   3. Recruitment
   4. Selection
   5. Placement
   6. Training
   7. Training
   8. Development
   9. Promotion and Career Planning
   10. Transfer
   11. Performance Appraisal
   12. Compensation
   13. Determination of Remuneration.
  4. Discus any three Communication methods
       Communication Methods
       A connected team and a connected organization in today’s world is the only way we can
       achieve greater things. Connections and relations are built with exchange of thoughts and
       information. Communication serves as a valuable mechanism in building these
       connections and engagement between people.

       Communication is a very important skill and art. There are four different ways we
       communicate with others. No matter what form of communication we choose, it is
       important to have the right intention to connect with the other person.

       1. Written
       It refers to printed or recorded materials such as plans, contracts, memos, minutes of the
       meeting, requirement analysis document, design documents risk registers and other
       related written materials. It is used to provide well-thought and well-planned details, thus
       easily to be reviewed than verbal communication because everything that has been
       written cannot be altered right away. More so, it can be used for future reference.



                                               234
Written communication can be time consuming, but is extremely essential for formal
scenarios which require approvals and having legal implications as well. Emails have
ushered in a revolution in making written communication very fast and thus have become
a preferred mechanism for sharing detailed information in fraction of a second.

2. Oral/Verbal
It involves the exchange of message or information by using words verbally through face
to face or telephone conversations. It is the most common type of conversation as it paves
way to get feedback right after receiving the message. It is known to be spontaneous as
well. In verbal communication, the ability to listen and think carefully before speaking is
critical.

A person must be careful of the words or expressions to be said. Any word that has been
spoken cannot be taken back, so it is important to formulate expressions or sentences
carefully.

3. Non-Verbal
Non-verbal communication is sending information without the use of words. It is mostly
through one’s body language, gestures, eye-contacts, appearance, pitch and tone of one’s
voice etc. one can communicate huge amount of feelings and emotions.

They say, “It is important to understand what has not been said explicitly”.

Non-verbal communication includes, body-language, paralanguage (pitch and tone of
voice), appearance etc. Research has shown that nonverbal cues or body language along
with facial expressions, tone of voice and body stance account for almost 55% of all the
communication that takes place.

4. Visual Communication
“A picture is worth a thousand words”. Visual aids such as animation, colour, illustration,
graphs & charts, drawing, signs and logos immensely enhance written communication.
Visual communication is also used in the right balance for making information sharing
more effective and efficient.
5. Explain any 4 ethical issues in operating theatre
You are the chair of your medical center’s ethics committee and director of the hospital’s
ethics consultation service. As an otolaryngologist with a busy surgical practice, you
spend a good deal of time in the operating room and understand the special ethical
challenges that this patient care center can pose for surgeons and staff. Additionally, you
worked recently as the chief of the specialty surgical services.


                                        235
   Your presence is requested for a conference meeting with the hospital’s medical director,
   chief of surgical services, chief hospital nurse, and head nurse of the operating room.
   During this meeting, these individuals indicate that they are undertaking an effort to
   review all of the procedural rules and guidelines for the operating room (OR), including
   the recent statement by the American College of Surgeons on the responsibility of the
   primary attending surgeon during surgery. These leaders seek your input and advice
   regarding ethical considerations that could have a bearing on the revision and/or
   clarification of the procedural rules and guidelines. They realize that it is important to
   understand “ethics in the OR” for many of the everyday challenges and dilemmas that
   arise during the course of performing surgery.

   You agree to provide your knowledge and perspectives, and those of other surgeons who
   participate in the ethics committee’s deliberations, for their consideration. The first set of
   procedures and rules for the primary attending surgeon that they would like for you to
   address includes the following:

   Informing patients, during the consent process, about staff members who will be a
   functional part of the surgical team, and alerting them to team members’ roles and
   experience level; and
   Informing patients clearly and concisely about the process of overlapping, sequenced,
   and multidisciplinary surgeries under the direction of the primary attending surgeon, and
   about how this practice might affect their care

6. Explain any 10 examples of Interpersonal skills
    Active listening.
    Teamwork.
    Responsibility.
    Dependability.
    Leadership.
    Motivation.
    Flexibility.
    Patience
    7. Describe six leadership skills
    The Six Styles of Leadership
    Visionary — mobilize people toward a vision. ...
    Coaching — develop people for the future. ...
    Affiliative — create emotional bonds and harmony. ...
    Democratic — build consensus through participation. ...
    Pacesetting — expect excellence and self-direction. ...
    Commanding — demand immediate compliance

                                            236
 8. State the 10 effective qualities of a team leader
The qualities of an effective team leader inspire the trust and respect of the team and
stimulate production within the workplace.
A Clear Communicator. ...
Strong Organization Skills. ...
Confident in the Team. ...
Respectful to Others. ...
Fair and Kind. ...
An Example of Integrity. ...
Influential in Core Areas. ...
Willing to Delegate
  9. What Is the Importance of Studying Management Theories & Practice
People who create management theories rely upon observation and mathematics in order
to construct a model for business activities. Management practice relies upon case studies
and the individual experiences of managers when dealing with workplace situations.
Since both schools of management have flaws and benefits, a business owner should
study both styles of management in order to improve profitability.
   Benefits of Learning
Employees most commonly leave their jobs due to poor management practices, a
situation that increases costs and lowers the talent present in a business. Business owners
should understand good management practices through personal research or formal
education in order to create a business model that can improve employee productivity,
eliminate redundancy in processes and increase retention rates.

Limitations of Theory and Practice
Management theories face limitations, because models of human behavior in a business
do not consider all of the variables that can impact profitability. Different businesses face
different issues with employees, financial resources and the use of technology.
For example, a workplace of single mothers requires a company to focus more on family
leave, a consideration that a theorist might not work into a general business model.
Management practice can also result in flawed management behavior, because managers
cannot see the business as a whole and instead rely solely upon their own experience.

Creating Uniformity of Management
Management theories work best from a macro perspective, such as when a business
determines the appropriate model for management as a whole or starts a large project that
it has never attempted before. The formal structure of this type of management works
best for large corporations that have a top-down management structure which requires


                                         237
    uniformity in order to accomplish goals, even if this model slightly decreases
    productivity.

    Personalized Management Style
    Since management practices rely upon the opinions of managers and employees or a case
    study in a particular area of business, they work best for informal organizations. Little
    doubt exists as to whether a management model will work, because the track record of
    the model speaks for itself. Management practices focus more on dynamics between
    groups, which allows managers more flexibility in making decisions and helps employees
    function together as a unit when they work together on a project.

    Putting Theory Into Application
    Business owners should mix management practices and theories together based upon
    their business model. A small business owner will usually study and implement
    management practices, because he requires flexibility to sustain his business mode. As
    his business grows, he may add some elements of management theory in order to
    formalize the decision making and leadership qualities of management.




References
Louis A. Allen, Management and Organization, McGraw-Hill Kogakusha, Ltd.
Jit S. Chandan, Organizational Behaviour, Vikas Publishing House.
Fred Luthans, Organizational Behaviour, McGraw-Hill.
Stephens P. Robbins,” Organizational Behaviour”, Prentice-Hall India.
Laurie J. Mullins,” Management and Organizational Behaviour”, Pitman.




                                           238
                        CHAPTER FOURTEEN
    PARTICIPATION IN PERIOPERATIVE THEATRE CLINICAL SERVICES
UNIT OF LEARNING CODE: HE/CU/TT/CR/07/6/A
 Related Unit of Competency in Occupational Standard: Participate in Perioperative
                             Theatre Clinical Services
                   142   1.1 Introduction to the unit of learning

This unit standard specifies competencies required to provide PT clinical services. It involves
preparing emergency trolley, participating in patients and procedure verification, wheeling,
inducing, reversal and monitoring of the patient to be operated.
                        143     1.2 Summary of Learning Outcomes
  1. Prepare for Perioperation Theatre clinical services
  2. Assist in Perioperation Theatre clinical services
  3. Evaluate Perioperation Theatre clinical services
  4. Wide-up Perioperation Theatre clinical services
   1.2.1 Learning Outcome: Prepare for Perioperation Theatre clinical services
   1.2.2 Introduction to the learning outcome
This unit describes the competencies required to Prepare for Perioperation Theatre clinical
services. This learning outcome involves, theatre Layout, types of surgeries performed in
theatre, basic anesthesia, preparation of emergency trolley, use of drugs in the emergency
trolley, verification and reception of patients in theatre, wheeling of patients to the PT table,
positioning of patient on the PT table, patient induction and reversal materials, prepping and
draping the patient Reporting patient’s condition, re-arranging the Operation Theatre,
documentation of patients’ condition, specimen handling ,decontamination, types of wastes in
                                             239
  Operation Theatre and respective disposal methods and last offices services in Operation
  Theatre.
     1.2.3 Performance Standard
1.1 Emergency trolley is identified in accordance with standard operating procedures (SOPs)
1.2 Emergency trolley is prepared according to standard operating procedures
1.3 Drug/resuscitation trolley is prepared in accordance with standard operating procedures
1.4 Patient to be operated is identified according to theatre list, patient identification number (IP
    No.), patient’s file and identification band
1.5 Operation table is prepared according to operation theatre procedures
1.6 Induction and reversal materials are prepared in accordance with procedure to be undertaken
    and WHO standards

                                     144    Information Sheet
  Definition of key terms
  Aerosol- Dispersion of fine mist, droplets, or particulate matter into air (transitive verb:
  aerosolize, to become airborne).
  Antisepsis -Prevention of sepsis by the exclusion, destruction, or inhibition of growth or
  multiplication of microorganisms from body tissues and fluids.
  Antiseptics- Inorganic chemical compounds that combat sepsis by inhibiting the growth of
  microorganisms without necessarily killing them.
  Barrier -Material used to reduce or inhibit the migration or transmission of microorganisms in
  the environment.
  Cross-contamination -Transmission of microorganisms from patient to patient and from
  inanimate objects to patients and vice versa.
  Decontamination- Cleaning and disinfecting or sterilizing processes carried out to make
  contaminated items safe to handle.
  Disinfection -Chemical or mechanical destruction of most pathogens rendering an object safe
  to handle. Fomite Inanimate object that may be contaminated with infectious organisms and that
  serves to transmit disease.
  Pathogenic microorganisms -Microorganisms that cause infectious disease. They can invade
  healthy tissue through some power of their own or can injure tissue by a toxin they produce.
  Sterile -Free of living microorganisms, including all spores.
  Sterile field- Area around the site of incision into tissue or site of introduction of an instrument
  into a body orifice that has been prepared for the use of sterile supplies and equipment. This area


                                                  240
  includes all furniture covered with sterile drapes and all personnel who are properly attired in
  sterile garb.
  Sterile technique -Methods by which contamination with microorganisms is prevented to
  maintain sterility throughout the surgical procedure.


 a) Theatre Layout

Operation theatre is the area in which surgical operating work is carried out. This area is also
known as ‘operating department’ or ‘operation suite’.

The design of the surgical suite offers a challenge to the planning team to optimize efficiency by
creating realistic traffic and workflow patterns for patients, visitors, personnel, and supplies. The
design also should allow for flexibility and future expansion. Architects consult surgeons,
perioperative nurses, and surgical services administrative personnel before designating functional
space within the surgical suite.

Location The surgical suite is usually located in an area accessible to the critical care surgical
patient areas and the supporting service departments, the central service or sterile processing
department, the pathology department, and the radiology department. The size of the hospital is a
determining factor because locating every desirable unit or department immediately adjacent to
the surgical suite is complex.

Perioperative theatre zones based on sterility

Unrestricted Area

 Street clothes are permitted. A corridor on the periphery accommodates traffic from outside,
including patients. This area is isolated by doors from the main hospital corridor and elevators
and from other areas of the surgical suite. It serves as an outside- to-inside access area (i.e., a
transition zone). Traffic, although not limited, is monitored at a central location. The control desk
is accessible from the unrestricted area.

Semi restricted Area

 Traffic is limited to properly attired, authorized personnel. Scrub suits and head/beard coverings
are required attire. This area includes peripheral support areas, central processing, and access
corridors to the operating rooms (ORs). The patient’s hair is also covered. Bald heads are
covered to prevent distribution of dead skin cells and dander that carry microorganisms.

Restricted Area

Masks are required to supplement OR attire where open sterile supplies and scrubbed personnel
are located. Sterile procedures are carried out in the OR and procedure rooms. There are also
                                                241
scrub sink areas and sub sterile rooms or clean core areas where unwrapped supplies are
sterilized. Personnel entering this area for short periods, such as laboratory technicians, may
wear clean surgical cover gowns or jumpsuits to cover street clothes. Hair/beard covering is
worn, and masks are donned as appropriate.

Transition zones both patients and personnel enter the semi restricted and restricted areas of the
surgical suite through a transition zone. This transition zone, inside the entrance to the surgical
suite, separates the semi restricted OR corridors from the rest of the facility. Masks, caps, shoe
covers, and cover gowns (or jumpsuits) may be located on a cart near transition zones adjacent to
restricted areas. Nonsurgical personnel who need to enter the restricted zone can don a cover

Figure 1 showing the operation theatre layout




A terminal location is preferred to prevent unrelated traffic from passing through the suite. A
location on a top floor is not necessary for microbial control because all air is specially filtered to
control dust. Traffic noises may be less evident above the ground floor. Artificial lighting is
controllable, so the need for daylight is not a factor; in fact, daylight may be a distraction during
the use of video equipment and other procedures that require a darkened environment. Most
surgical suites have solid walls without windows. However, some ambulatory surgery rooms
have windows to create an ambiance of openness in the suite.

Space Allocation and Traffic Patterns Space is allocated within the surgical suite to provide for
the work to be done, with consideration given to the efficiency with which it can be
accomplished. The surgical suite should be large enough to allow for correct technique yet small
                                                 242
enough to minimize the movement of patients, personnel, and supplies. Provision must be made
for traffic control. The type of design predetermines traffic patterns. Everyone—staff, patients,

    Functions that can be performed in OT
     Perform surgery in safe, aseptic environment
     Ascertain patient’s comforts, both physical & emotional
     Maintain high standard of performance
     Acquire, maintain & suitably utilize equipment
     Maintain theatre discipline by following prescribed procedures & by updating them from
      time to time
    Attempt maximum utilization of theatre time by proper scheduling
    Prevent iatrogenic complications
    Prevent health hazard from environmental, radiological, anesthetic & infecting agents
    Minimize postponement of surgery

       Location of OT

OT is centralized block in which all the operating rooms are situated. This arrangement has
following advantages:

   1. Avoids duplication of expensive equipment
   2. Avoids duplication of expensive equipment
   3. Avoids need to duplicate routine facilities like changing room, scrub room, surgeon’s room
      etc.
   4. Supervision becomes easy
   5. It is easier to ensure uniformity & consistency in the procedures
   6. Idle theatre time can be reduced

Location of OT should consider following points:

   1. Easy approachability, whether it is horizontal traffic or vertical traffic in high rise building.
   2. Proximity of central sterile supply department. If that is not possible, it should at least have
      Proper regional sterile supply section.
   3. Proximity to intensive care areas.
   4. Proximity to interventional laboratories of super specialty departments

       Structure of OT

OT can be divided into clearly demarcated four zones to indicate specific precautions to be
practiced before crossing the border of each zone. This zones indicate

        Relatively clean area
        Absolutely clean area
        Absolutely clean & aseptic area
        Unclean area

                                                 243
Outermost Zone: This zone is called as protective zone. This zone is clean, but not sterile area.
In this area following activities are housed

        Administrative area
        Operation theatre superintendent or manager
        Office or the anesthesia chief
        Space for surgeons to write or dictate operation notes
        Frozen section biopsy laboratory
        Dark room for developing X-Ray films
        Changing room
        Surgeon’s room
        Trolley bay
        Waiting area for relatives

Intermediate zone: This zone is clear, but not sterile. Entry for people bringing supplies,
patients etc. can be permitted after changing foot-wear. However, people who have not scrubbed
or changed should not be allowed to go to inner zone. It includes following

        Storage area for equipment & instruments
        Supply received from central sterilization & supply department
        Medicines, intravenous fluids, other consumable items and linen
        Post-operative recovery room having 1.5 to 2 beds per operating table
        Preoperative waiting patients

Inner most zone: This area is kept absolutely clean & sterile. No one other than persons actually
involved in doing surgery or assisting in surgery should be allowed to enter. In teaching hospitals
4 to 5 students are permitted after changing. This zone includes

        operating room (minimum size 18ft* 20 ft)
        Anesthesia induction room
        Patient holding areas
        Scrub area for surgeons & nurses

Unclean zone for disposal: This zone is used for temporary storage of

        Used linen
        Used instruments
        Waste material
        Cleaning gloves, instruments

       Sub areas in OT

Pre-operative check in area (reception): This is important with respect to maintaining privacy,
for changing from street clothes to gown and to provide lockers and lavatories for staff.

Staff room: Men and women change dress from street cloth to OT attire.
                                                 244
Holding area: This area is planned for IV line insertion, preparation, catheter / gastric tube
insertion, connection of monitors, & shall have O2 and suction lines. Facility for CPR should be
available in this area.

Post anesthetic care units (PACU): preferably adjacent to recovery room. These should contain
a medication station, hand washing station, nurse station, storage space for stretchers, supplies
and monitors / equipment and gas, suction outlets and ventilator. Additionally 80 sq. ft. (7.43 sq.
m) for each patient bed, clearance of 5 ft. (1.5 m) between beds and 4 ft. (1.22m) between patient
bed sides and adjacent walls should be planned.

Sanitary facility for staff: One wash basin and one western closet (WC) should be provided for
8-10 persons. Showers and their number is a matter of local decision. Inclusion of toilet facilities
in changing rooms is not acceptable; they should be located in an adjacent space.

The anesthesia gas / cylinder manifold room / storage area: A definite area to be designated.
It should be in a cool, clean room that is constructed of fire resistant materials. Conductive
flooring must be present but is not required if non inflammable gases are stored. Adequate
ventilation to allow leaking gases to escape, safety labels and separate places for empty and full
cylinders to be allocated.

Rest rooms: Pleasant and quiet rest for staff should be arranged either as one large room for all
grades of staff or as separate rooms; both have merits. Comfortable chairs, one writing table, a
book case etc., may be arranged.

     Types of OT complexes

There are three main categories of operating theatre:

   1. The single theatre suite with OT, scrub-up and gowning, anesthesia room, trolley
      preparation, utility and exit bay plus staff change and limited ancillary accommodation.
   2. The twin theatre suite with facilities similar to 1, but with duplicated ancillary
      accommodation immediate to each OT, sometimes sharing a small post anesthesia recovery
      area.
   3. OT complexes of three or more OTs. With ancillary accommodation including post
      anesthesia recovery, reception, porter’s desk, sterile store and staff change.

    Ideal OT should have following characteristics
    Operative room for routine work (18ft * 20 ft)
    Super specialty departments like neurosurgery & cardiac surgery require bigger area i.e.
      about 500ft to 600ft, as these theaters need to have more equipment
    Effecting air conditioning should maintain the temperature as per requirement
    Efficient & sincere paramedical & non-medical staff to carry out necessary instructions
      promptly.
    Walls: Smooth wall which is impermeable to moisture having finish of epoxy resin or vinyl
      sheets type of painting.

                                                245
      Doors: Main door to the OT complex has to be of adequate width (1.2 to 1.5 m). The doors
       of each OT should be spring loaded flap type, but sliding doors are preferred as no air
       currents are generated. All fittings in OT should be flush type and made of steel.
      Flooring: The surface / flooring must be slip resistant, strong & impervious with minimum
       joints (e.g. mosaic with copper plates for antistatic effect) or jointless conductive tiles/
       terrazzo, linoleum etc., the recommended minimum conductivity is 1m ohm and maximum
       10m Ohms.

    Infection Control
    Nurse / surgeon having respiratory infection or finger infection should not participate in
      surgical procedures.
    It is desirable for surgeons / nurses to wash their hands first with the gloves on. After
      washing, gloves need to be put in the basin containing sodium hypochlorite solution to
      prevent risk of spread of infection, particularly HIV. Mask, cap, gowns need to be placed
      in a plastic drum containing sodium hypochlorite solution.

  Types of surgeries in OT

There are various types of surgery and they can be classified based on different parameters.

Based on Timing

Surgery can be classified based on the urgency and need to perform the surgery.

   1. Elective Surgery

  17. The name “elective” might imply that this type of surgery is optional, but that’s not always
  the case. An elective procedure is simply one that is planned in advance, rather than one that’s
  done in an emergency situation. A wide range of surgical procedures can be considered elective
  surgery. Cosmetic surgeries fall into this category, but so can things like ear
  tubes, tonsillectomies, and scoliosis surgery. Although these procedures may be done
  “electively,” they can be significant and potentially life-changing operations.
    2. Semi-elective Surgery

  18. Semi-elective surgery is a surgery that must be done to preserve the patient’s life, but does
  not need to be performed immediately.
   3. Urgent Surgery

An urgent surgery is one that can wait until the patient is medically stable, but should generally
be done today or tomorrow

   4. Emergency Surgery

An emergency surgery is one that must be performed without delay; the patient has no choice
other than immediate surgery, if they do not want to risk permanent disability or death.
                                                246
  Based on Body Part

Surgery can also be classified based on the body part that is being operated on.

When surgery is performed on one organ system or structure, it may be classed by the tissue,
organ or organ system involved. Examples include:

1. Gastrointestinal surgery

This type of surgery is performed within the digestive tract and its accessory organs.

Gastrointestinal surgery involves the treatment for diseases of the parts of the body involved in
digestion. This includes the esophagus, stomach, small intestine, large intestine, and rectum. It
also includes the liver, gallbladder, and pancreas

2. Orthopedic surgery

This is performed on bones or muscles. The medical specialty dedicated to the diagnosis,
treatment, rehabilitation, and prevention of injuries of the musculoskeletal system including
the muscles, bones, spine, joints, ligaments, tendons, and nerves.

3. Cardiovascular Surgery

Cardiovascular surgery is the surgical treatment of diseases and disorders of the heart and blood
vessels. Examples of cardiovascular surgery include open heart surgery such as coronary artery
bypass grafting, heart valve replacements, heart transplant and vascular surgery such as
abdominal aortic aneurysm repairs and femoral-tibial bypass grafting.

4. Gynaecology

Gynaecology refers to the surgical specialty dealing with the health of the female reproductive
system (uterus, vagina and ovaries).

5. Neurosurgery

The surgical specialty involved in the treatment of disorders of the brain, spinal cord, and
peripheral nerves.

6. Ophthalmology (Eyes)

A medical specialty focusing on the diagnosis and treatment of disorders of the eye. Conditions
include cataracts, glaucoma, and conjunctivitis, among others.

7. Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery


                                                247
A dental specialty focusing on the diagnosis and surgical treatment of diseases, injuries and
defects of the mouth, teeth and gums. Examples of oral surgery include removal of wisdom teeth,
facial injury repair, cleft lip and palate repair, and repair of uneven jaws.

8. Otolaryngology – Ears, Nose and Throat (ENT)

Otolaryngology is the medical and surgical treatment of the head and neck, including ears, nose
and throat.

9. Thoracic

This is also known as cardiothoracic surgery. This is the field of medicine involved in surgical
treatment of organs inside the thorax (the chest) generally treatment of conditions of
the heart (heart disease) and lungs (lung disease).




10. Urology

This is a type of surgery that is performed on the urinary tract. It is a surgical specialty that deals
with problems affecting the urinary tract including kidneys, bladder, and prostate.

  Based on Equipment Used

Surgery can also be classified based on the type of surgical equipment used for the procedure.

  Based on degree of invasiveness

Surgery can also be classified based on the degree of invasiness of the surgical procedure. By
invasion, this refers to the medical procedure in which the part of the body is entered by incision.

 1. Minimally Invasive Surgery

Minimally invasive surgery is any technique involved in surgery that does not require a large
incision. This relatively new approach allows the patient to recuperate faster with less pain. Not
all conditions are suitable for minimally invasive surgery. Many surgery techniques now fall
under minimally invasive surgery: Laparoscopy, Endoscopy, Arthroscopy and many others.

 2. Open Surgery

An “open” surgery means the cutting of skin and tissues so that the surgeon has a full view of the
structures or organs involved. Examples of open surgery are the removal of the organs, such as
the gallbladder or kidneys.

                                                  248
  Based on purpose

Surgery can also be classified based on the purpose for which the surgery is being performed.
Surgeries are performed for various purposes and such can be classified based on the purpose for
the surgery.

1. Exploratory surgery

Exploratory surgery is a diagnostic method used by doctors when trying to find a diagnosis for
an ailment. It is used most commonly to diagnose or locate cancer in humans.

2. Therapeutic surgery

Therapeutic surgery treats a previously diagnosed condition

 3. Cosmetic surgery

Cosmetic surgery is where a person chooses to have an operation, or invasive medical procedure,
to change their physical appearance for cosmetic rather than medical reasons.



 b) Basic pharmacology
   Pharmacology is the study of the interaction of chemicals with living systems.
   Drugs are chemicals that act on living systems at the chemical (molecular) level.
  Medical pharmacology is the study of drugs used for the diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of
  disease.
  Toxicology is the study of the untoward effects of chemical agents on living systems. It is usually
  considered an area of pharmacology.
   Pharmacodynamic properties of a drug describe the action of the drug on the body, including
  receptor interactions, dose-response phenomena, and mechanisms of therapeutic and toxic
  action.
  Pharmacokinetic properties describe the action of the body on the drug, including absorption,
  distribution, metabolism, and excretion. Elimination of a drug may be achieved by metabolism
  or by excretion.
  The nature of drugs
  Size. The great majority of drugs lie in the range from molecular weight 100 to 1,000. Drugs in
  this range are large enough to allow selectivity of action and small enough to allow adequate
  movement within the various compartments in the body.
  Chemistry and reactivity. Drugs may be small, simple molecules (amino acids, simple amines,
  organic acids, alcohols, esters, ions, etc.), carbohydrates, lipids, or even proteins. Binding of
  drugs to their receptors.


                                                249
  Absorption of Drugs. Drugs usually enter the body at sites remote from the target tissue and
  are carried by the circulation to the intended site of action. Before a drug can enter the
  bloodstream, it must be absorbed from its site of administration. The rate and efﬁciency of
  absorption differs depending on the route of administration.

    Common routes of administration of drugs and some of their features.
      1. Oral (swallowed).
   Maximum convenience but may be slower and less complete than parenteral (non-oral) routes.
   Dissolution of solid formulations (e. g tablets) must occur ﬁrst. The drug must survive exposure
   to stomach acid. This route of administration is subject to the ﬁrst pass effect (metabolism of a
   signiﬁcant amount of drug in the gut wall and the liver, before it reaches the systemic
   circulation).
      2. Sublingual (under the tongue).
   Permits direct absorption into the systemic venous circulation thus avoiding the ﬁrst pass effect.
   May be fast or slow depending on the physical formulation of the product. Nitroglycerin is
   administered by this route in the treatment of angina.
      3. Rectal (suppository).
   Same advantage as sublingual route; larger amounts are feasible. Useful for patients who cannot
   take oral medications (e.g. because of nausea and vomiting).
      4. Intramuscular.
   Absorption is sometimes faster and more complete than after oral administration. Large volumes
   (e.g. 5 - 10 mL) may be given. Requires an injection. Generally more painful than subcutaneous
   injection. Vaccines are usually administered by this route.
      5. Subcutaneous.
   Slower absorption than intramuscular. Large volumes are not feasible. Requires an injection.
   Insulin is administered by this route.
      6. Inhalation
    For respiratory diseases, this route deposits drug close to the target organ; when used for
   systemic administration (e.g., nicotine in cigarettes, inhaled general anesthetics) it provides
   rapid absorption because of the large surface area available in the lungs.
      7. Topical
Application to the skin or mucous membrane of the nose, throat, airway, or vagina for a local
effect. It is important to note that topical drug administration can result in signiﬁcant absorption
of drug into the systemic circulation. Drugs used to treat asthma are usually administered this
way.
      8. Transdermal
Application to the skin for systemic effect. Transdermal preparations generally are patches that
stick to the skin and are worn for a number of hours or even days. To be effective by the
transdermal route, drugs need to be quite lipophilic. Nicotine is available as a transdermal patch
for those who are trying to stop cigarette smoking.
     9. Intravenous.
                                                250
        Instantaneous and complete absorption (by deﬁnition, 100%); potentially more dangerous
        because the systemic circulation is transiently exposed to high drug concentrations.
        Distribution of Drugs
  i.          The distribution of drugs from the site of absorption, through the bloodstream and to the
     target tissue depends upon:
ii. The blood ﬂow to the tissue is important in the rate of uptake of a drug. Tissues that receive a
         high degree of blood ﬂow (e.g., brain, kidney) have a fast rate of uptake whereas tissues with
         a low degree of blood ﬂow (e.g., adipose tissue) accumulate drug more slowly.
iii. Solubility of the drug in the tissue. Some tissues, e.g., brain, have a high lipid content and
          dissolve a higher concentration of lipophilic agents.
iv.       Binding of the drug to macromolecules in the blood or tissue limits their distribution.
  v.          The ability to cross special barriers. Many drugs are poorly distributed to the brain and
     the testis because these tissues contain specialized capillaries (the smallest type of blood vessel).
     The endothelial cells that line these capillaries form a blood-brain barrier and a blood testis
     barrier by preventing the movement of hydrophilic molecules out of the blood and into the tissue,
     and by actively pumping lipophilic molecules out of the endothelial cell and into the blood. Of
     special concern is the ability of drugs to distribute to breast milk in lactating women, and the
     ability of drugs to cross the placenta (the specialized tissue connecting a pregnant woman and
     her fetus) and affect the developing fetus. A number of drugs are known to be teratogens (drugs
     that cause abnormal fetal development) and should be avoided in pregnancy. Women taking
     drugs that are considered unsafe for infants and that achieve appreciably high concentrations in
     breast milk should not breast-feed their infants. Information about the safety of drugs in
              Elimination of Drugs
      The rate of elimination (disappearance of active drug molecules from the bloodstream or body)
     is almost always related to termination of pharmacodynamics effect. Therefore, knowledge of
     plasma concentrations of a drug is important in describing the intensity and duration of a drug’s
     effect. There are two major routes of elimination:
     1. Excretion. The most common route for drug excretion is through the kidney and out of the
     body in the urine. To be excreted by the kidney, drugs need to be reasonably hydrophilic so that
     they will remain in the ﬂuid that becomes the urine. Patients with impaired kidney function
     usually have a reduced ability to eliminate hydrophilic drugs. To avoid excessively high drug
     concentrations in these patients, you will need to reduce their dosages or give dosages less
     frequently. A few drugs enter the bile duct and are excreted in the feces.
              Metabolism.
     The action of many drugs, especially lipophilic compounds, is terminated by enzymatic
     conversion, or metabolism, to biologically inactive derivatives. In most cases, the enzymatic
     conversion forms a more hydrophilic compound that can be more readily excreted in the urine.
     Most of the enzymes that catalyze drug-metabolizing reactions are located in the gastrointestinal
     tract and the liver. Some drugs inhibit drug-metabolizing enzymes and thus cause drug-drug
     interactions when co-administered with drugs that depend upon metabolism for elimination

                                                    251
  Classification of drugs
          Antibiotics
Are agents/drugs used to treat diseases caused by microorganisms-bacteria, viruses, fungi,
protozoa.
Overuse and inappropriate use of antibiotics has fueled a major increase in prevalence of
multidrug-resistant pathogens
       Antimicrobial Prophylaxis
Should be used in cases where efficacy has been demonstrated and benefits outweigh the risks of
prophylaxis.
       Surgical Prophylaxis
Surgical wound infections are a major category of nosocomial infections
  General principles of antimicrobial surgical prophylaxis:
       a) The antibiotic should be active against common surgical wound pathogens;
           unnecessarily broad coverage should be avoided.
       b) The antibiotic should have proved efficacy in clinical trials.
       c) The antibiotic must achieve concentrations greater than the minimum inhibitory
           concentration (MIC) of suspected pathogens, and these concentrations must be
           present at the time of incision.
           Analgesics
• Norciception involves periphral and central mechanisms including an emotional component
• Mediators of pain include: serotonin, prostaglandins
• Analgesics inhibit, mimic or potentiate natural mediators of pain
• Pain receptors on the skin are naked nerve endings
• Sites of actions of analgesics include:
 – Site of injury e.g. NSAIDS
 – Periphral nerves e.g local anaesthetics
 – Thalamus – by closing ‘’gates’’ of the thalamus e.g. opiods, TCAs
 – Some analgesics alter the central appreciation of pain e.g opiods,
       Classes of analgesics:
      • NSAIDS
      • Opiod analgesics
      • Anaesthetic agents
            • Local
            • General
      • Other drugs with some analgesic effect
            • TCAs
  Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
• These drugs also exert antipyretic and analgesic effects.
• Their anti-inflammatory properties makes them most useful in the management of disorders in
    which pain is related to the intensity of the inflammatory process.

                                             252
• NSAIDs are grouped in several chemical classes:
 – Propionic acid derivatives e.g. ibuprofen
 – Indole derivatives e.g. indomethacin
 – Phenylacetic acid derivatives e.g. diclofenac
 – Fenamates e.g meclofenamic acid, mefenamic acid
 – Oxicams e.g. piroxicam
• Most of NSAIDS are well absorbed, and food does not substantially change their
    bioavailability.
• Most of the NSAIDs are highly metabolized in the liver by Cytochrome P450 enzymes
• Most are excreted renally while some undergo enterohepatic circulation
• NSAIDS are highly protein-bound (upto 98% for some)
   Mechanism of action of NSAIDS
     The anti-inflammatory/analgesic activity of the NSAIDs is mediated chiefly through
     inhibition of biosynthesis of prostaglandins
     This is achieved through selective or non-selective inhibition of cyclooxigenase (COX) 1 and
     2, the enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of prostaglandins
  Opioid analgesics
         Morphine, the prototypical opioid agonist, has long been known to relieve severe pain with
         remarkable efficacy
         Endogenous opiods include:
               – Endorphins
               – Enkephalins
               – Dynorphins
  MOA- Opioids bind to opioid receptors (i.e. µ, δ and κ) located in brain and spinal cord regions
  involved in the transmission and modulation of pain.
    • Classification of opioids
            i.   Strong agonists
       • Morphine, hydromorphone, and oxymorphone are strong agonists useful in treating
           severe pain
       • Pethidine- Does not inhibit uterine contraction thus can be used to control obstetric pain.
           Can cause respiratory depression in neonates
       • Heroin (diamorphine, diacetylmorphine) is potent and fast-acting, but its use is
           prohibited
       • Methadone
       • Fentanyl, sufentanil, alfentanil, and remifentanil
         d) Basic anaesthesia
     Anaesthesia means ‘loss of sensation’
     It is defined as a temporary state consisting of unconsciousness, loss of memory, lack of
     pain and muscle relaxation
     Anaesthetic agents are classified into two:
                     i. Local anaesthetics
                                                253
                  ii. General anaesthetics
           Local anaesthetics
     Cocaine, procaine, lidocaine/lignocaine, bupivacaine, benzocaine
     MOA - reversibly block impulse conduction along nerve axons and other excitable
     membranes that utilize sodium channels as the primary means of action potential
     generation.
     Clinically, local anesthetics are used to block pain sensation from (or sympathetic
     vasoconstrictor impulses to) specific areas of the body
  • Systemic absorption of injected local anesthetic from the site of administration is
     determined by
         – Dosage
         – Site of injection
         – Drug-tissue binding
         – Local blood flow
         – Use of vasoconstrictors (eg, epinephrine), and
         – The physicochemical properties of the drug itself
Local anesthetics are converted in the liver or in plasma to more water-soluble metabolites and
then excreted in the urine
Toxicity
        – Two major forms of local anesthetic toxicity are:
  Systemic effects following absorption of the local anesthetic from their site of administration
  and
  Direct neurotoxicity from the local effects of these drugs when administered in close proximity
  to the spinal cord and other major nerve trunks
  Lignocaine
  Is the most widely used LA
  Has a quick onset and medium duration of action
  Can be administered topically as a jell or aerosol
  Is used in all forms of local anesthesia


  Bupivacaine
  Is a long acting LA commonly used for epidural and spinal anaesthesia
  Has a slow onset of action with a duration of action between 5-12hrs
  Epidural half-life is much shorter (2hrs) but still longer than lignocaine
                                              254
    It is the LA of choice in obstetric surgeries
    May have acute CNS toxicity like lignocaine
     Rights of drug administration
  Safe drug and pharmaceutical administration in the OR is practiced according to the seven rights
  of medication administration in any setting:
              Right patient
              Right drug
              Right timing (cements/glues)(antibiotics)
              Right dose
              Right route
              Right reason
              Right documentation
      e) Emergency trolley and its purpose

Crash cart or code cart is a set of trays/drawers/shelves on wheels used in hospitals for
transportation and dispensing of emergency medication/equipment at site of medical/surgical
emergency for life support protocols to potentially save someone's life. The cart carries
instruments for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and other medical supplies while also functioning
as a support litter for the patient.

The contents of a crash cart vary from hospital to hospital, but typically contain the tools and
drugs needed to treat a person in or near cardiac arrest. These include but are not limited to:

       Monitor/defibrillators, suction devices, and bag valve masks (BVMs) of different sizes
       Advanced cardiac life support (ACLS) drugs such as epinephrine, atropine, amiodarone,
        lidocaine, sodium bicarbonate, dopamine, and vasopressin
       First line drugs for treatment of common problems such as: adenosine, dextrose,
        epinephrine for IM use, naloxone, nitroglycerin, and others
       Drugs for rapid sequence intubation: succinylcholine or another paralytic, and a sedative
        such as etomidate or midazolam; endotracheal tubes and other intubating equipment
       Drugs for peripheral and central venous access
       Pediatric equipment (common pediatric drugs, intubation equipment, etc.)
       Other drugs and equipment as chosen by the facility




   Equipment

       Airway (oral and nasal) all sizes
       McGill forceps, large and small

                                                255
   King Airway set (3) eliminates the need for laryngoscope and endotracheal tubes
   Bag valve mask (adult and pediatric)
   Nasal cannula
   Non rebreather oxygen face masks (3 sizes)
   IV start packs
   Normal saline solution (1000ml bags)
   IV tubing
   Angiocaths (various sizes)
   10ml normal saline flush syringes (3)
   Gauze
   Alcohol preps
   Monitor with defibrillator (preferred) or AED
   Syringe nasal adaptor (nasal narcan atomizer)
   A checklist confirming everything that should be on the cart (print this page, or buy our
    laminated checklist)
     Drugs
       Aspirin 81mg Tablets
       Nitroglycerin spray or 0.4mg tablets
       Dextrose 50% (dextrose 25% if treating pediatrics)
       Narcan 1mg/ml (6)
       Epinephrine 1:10,000 Abboject
       Atropine Sulfate 1mg Abboject
       Amiodarone 150mg Vial
       EpiPen
       EpiPen Jr
       Solumedrol 125mg vial
       Benadryl 50mg vial (2)
       Adenosine 6mg (4)
       Lopressor 10mg (2)
       Cardiazem 20mg vial (2)
       Pronestyl (procainamide) 1g in 10 ml 100mg/ml Vial (1)

    Why a Crash Cart?
    Any environment in which a patient may unexpectedly experience a medical emergency
    needs to have the equipment to deal with that emergency efficiently. That’s the job of a
    crash cart. A crash cart contains the equipment and medications that would be required to
    treat a patient in the first thirty minutes or so of a medical emergency. Although crash
    carts can differ somewhat depending upon their location, the basic crash cart will contain
    similar equipment.
                                           256
  Figure 1: Diagrams showing a crush cart




  (a)                                                                 (b)

  Maintenance of Crash Cart
The worst thing ever is to reach for a piece of emergency equipment or an emergency medication
and find it inoperable or expired. It is important that the crash cart be checked regularly and
maintained so that its contents are there when needed.
The following is a maintenance routine that should be completed at least monthly:
Expiration dates on medications should be checked on the first day of the month
  Expired medications should be promptly removed and replaced
  The defibrillation pads on the AED or the defibrillator should be checked for expiration date
  The battery charge on the monitor and/or AED should be checked and documented
  Use of drugs in the emergency trolley




                                             257
Allergy:
To treat allergy and hypersensitivity following drugs are commonly used in emergency
department of a hospital

        1.     Hydrocortisone sodium succinate injection, 100mg powder for reconstitution
        2.     Adrenaline 1 in 1,000 (1mg/mL)
        3.     Chlorphenamine tablets 4mg
        4.     Chlorphenamine injection 10mg/mL

     To reduce pain (Painkillers):
        1. Paracetamol tablets 500mg
        2. Dihydrocodeine tablets 30mg
        3. Cyclimorph® injection
        4. Diclofenac 75mg/3mL
     Anti-Narcotic
       Naloxone injection 400 micrograms/mL

Antibiotics:

Patients may encounter a variety of infections which may be caused by pathogenic micro-
organisms.

    Amoxicillin capsules/co-amoxiclav tablets and suspension
    Cefuroxime injection
    Cefalexin capsules
    Erythromycin tablets and mixture
    Trimethoprim tablets
    Metronidazole tablets
    Penicillin V tablets
    Benzylpenicillin injection 600mg vial

Cardiac Drugs:

    Aspirin tablets 300mg
    Atropine injection 600 micrograms/mL
    Digoxin tablets 250 micrograms
    Furosemide injection 50mg/5mL
    Lidocaine 2%, 5mL (100mg bolus)
    Glyceryl trinitrate spray
    Tenecteplase vial
    Dalteparin injection

Central Nervous System:

                                             258
    Diazepam injection 10mg/2mL
    Diazepam tablets 5mg
    Diazepam rectal tubes 5mg/2.5mL
    Chlorpromazine injection 50mg/2mL
    Chlorpromazine tablets 25mg
    Haloperidol injection 5mg/mL

Respiratory System:

    Aminophylline injection 250mg/10mL
    Hydrocortisone sodium succinate injection, 100mg powder for reconstitution
    Prednisolone tablets 5mg
    Salbutamol or terbutaline inhaler
    Salbutamol for nebuliser
    Ipratropium for nebuliser

       f) Aseptic techniques
It is impossible to exclude all microorganisms from the environment, but for the safety of both
patients and personnel, every effort is made to minimize and control these microorganisms.
Microorganisms are present in the air and on animate and inanimate objects at all times. To
effectively apply the principles of asepsis, environmental control, and sterile techniques
discussed in this chapter, the meaning of terms related to aseptic technique must first be
understood. Therefore the basis of prevention is the knowledge of causative agents and their
control, as well as the principles of aseptic and sterile techniques. The methods by which
microbial contamination is contained in the environment are referred to as aseptic technique.
The OR in the restricted area is aseptic at best because the room and air cannot ever be 100%
free of microbial content. Some key elements of asepsis include the following facts:
        • Aseptic technique is sometimes referred to as clean technique.
        • Items have been cleaned and decontaminated so they are safe to handle with clean,
       bare hands.
        • Items in use in patient care are handled with examination gloves for the protection of
       both the caregiver and the patient.
        • Items have been cleaned, decontaminated, disinfected, or terminally sterilized without
       a wrapper, and stored in a clean, dry place.
        • Items may start out sterile but are not maintained or used under sterile conditions. Skin
       preps may be packaged sterile, but skin cannot be sterilized. The process is aseptic.
        • Contamination is contained. Extraneous contamination is avoided.
        • Items are set up on clean towels or drapes and used with examination gloves.
        • Items are not sterile or maintained sterile during use. Extraneous contamination is
       avoided.
        • Disposable items are not cleaned and reused for another patient.


                                              259
 • Items are classified as semi critical or noncritical by Spaulding’s classification of the
importance of patient care items.
 • Items can be used outside the confines of the restricted area.
 • Items are used on intact skin or mucous membranes.
 • Items are not used when the patient’s vascular system will be entered.
Sterile Technique
Sterile technique incorporates many processes associated with asepsis but to a higher,
more controlled degree. In sterile technique all microorganisms must be maintained at an
irreducible minimum meaning as low as absolutely possible.
Keep in mind that a sealed sterile package must be opened at some point during patient
care to use the contents. That means opening the package to the room air. Even in the
restricted area the room air has a microbial count that we cannot eliminate. We try as
hard as possible to minimize the room traffic and maintain environmental controls to
maintain the sterile field. Essential elements of sterile technique include the following
factors:
 • Items are used only in a sterile field in the restricted area.
 • Items are used by sterile team members wearing appropriate sterile attire.
 • Items are used in areas of the patient’s body where the site has been prepped.
 • Items may be used in invasive surgery.
 • Items may be used in body areas with non-intact skin and membranes and may enter
the patient’s vascular system.
 • Items are classified as critical according to Spaulding’s level of importance of patient
care items.
 • Items have been cleaned, decontaminated, and packaged before sterilization.
 • Items processed by sterilization are stored wrapped and remain so until use by a sterile
team member.
 • Items are for individual patient use only. Reusable items can be reprocessed and
resterilized for use with another patient. Disposable items are discarded after use. If
opened and unused, disposable items are discarded.
 • Items that become contaminated are discarded and replaced immediately.
Patient Identification
Preadmission Procedures Some preoperative preparations can be performed in the
surgeon’s office. Patients are then referred to the preoperative testing center of the
hospital or ambulatory care facility. Tests and records should be completed and available
before the patient is admitted the day of the surgical procedure. Preadmission tests
(PATs) are scheduled according to the guidelines of each facility. Some tests are
acceptable only for a 30-day period or are repeated before admission. The type of testing
performed depends on the patient’s known or suspected condition and the complexity of
the surgical procedure. The preoperative preparations include:


                                        260
     1. Medical history and physical examination. These are performed and documented by a
     physician, nurse practitioner, physician assistant (PA), or the registered nurse first
     assistant (RNFA). Allergies and sensitivities should be noted. The preoperative nurse
     establishes the baseline for the patient’s vital signs
      2. Laboratory tests. Testing should be based on specific clinical indicators or risk
     factors that could affect surgical management or anesthesia. Tests include age, sex,
     preexisting disease, magnitude of surgical procedure, and type of anesthesia. Ideally
     these tests should be completed 24 hours before admission so the results are available for
     review. Some facilities perform laboratory studies the morning of the procedure.

     Blood type and cross match. If a transfusion is anticipated, the patient’s blood is typed
     and cross matched. Many patients prefer to have their own blood drawn and stored for
     auto transfusion. Patients should be advised that blood banks charge an additional fee to
     store and preserve autologous blood for personal use. Even if the patient is to have an
     auto transfusion, his or her blood should still be typed and cross matched in the event that
     additional transfusions are needed. If the patient refuses to accept blood transfusions, the
     appropriate documentation of refusal should be completed according to the policies and
     procedures of the facility


Self-assessment
Written assessment
 1. Name five emergency drugs found in the crush cart that can be used on respiratory
    system diseases
 2. What are the rights of drug administration to ensure safe drug administration?
 3. Name three classifications of drugs used in pain management/analgesics
 4. What is the ideal location of an operation theatre
 5. State 5 operation table accessories
 6. Name five intravenous anesthesia inducing agents
Practical assessment
a) Conduct a hospital visit in an operation theatre;
 1. Examine a crash cart and write down a report; include all the drugs and equipment
    required for emergency and use of the crash cart in emergency.
 2. On the flash cards provided, draw a diagram to illustrate the operation theatre lay out for
    the Operation visited; identify the important zones and areas
 3. Perform a role play in groups of twos demonstrating how patient identification is
    performed before surgery.

    Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials

                                             261
     Operating theatre/Skills laboratory
     Crush cart
     Gloves
     Flash cards
     Operation theatre table
     Scrubs
     Surgical head cover
     Desktops/computers/laptops
     Projectors
     Mannequin
     References

Berry & Kohn’s (2017) Operating room techniques, 13th edition, Elsevier publishers, Canada.

Brunner & Suddath (2010) Medical surgical Nursing, 12th edition, Seattle Saunders, USA

Dr. Masoud Sirat Nir (2016) Medical terminology student nurse in operating theatres




                                           262
Learning Outcome 2: Assist in Peri-operative Theatre clinical services
Introduction to the learning outcome
This learning outcome involves receiving the patient to the operating room, verifying patient
using the safety checklist, wheeling the patient to operating room, positioning the patient to the
operation table, handing over inducing agents to anesthetist, monitoring the patient and assisting
in patient reversal.
1.2.3 Performance Standard
1.1 Patient is verified according to procedure to be undertaken, theatre list, patient
identification number (IP No.), patient’s file and identification band
1.2 Patient is received according to Standard Operation Procedures
1.3 Patient to be operated is wheeled to operation table according to Standard Operation
Procedures
1.4 Patient is positioned according to surgical procedure to be undertaken
1.5 Induction materials are handed over to the anesthetist according to Standard Operation
Procedures and type of anesthesia
1.6 Patient is monitored according to standard operating procedures and doctors’ instructions
1.7 Reversal materials are handed over to anesthetist in accordance to type of anesthesia given
and Standard Operation Procedures
1.8 Patient is wheeled to Post Anesthesia Care Unit (PACU)/recovery room according to
Standard Operating Procedure
1.2.4 Information Sheet
Definition of key terms
PACU - Post Anesthesia Care Unit
Content/procedures/methods/illustrations
Verification and reception of patients in theatre
     Admission to the Pre surgical Holding Area
     The holding area nurse greets the patient by name and introduces himself or herself. The
     nurse stands next to the midsection of the stretcher so the patient can comfortably see him
     or her. The holding area nurse performs the following steps and documents them on the
     surgical checklist: Places a warm blanket on the patient, verifies patient identification by
     name and date of birth, and notifies the individual at the surgery control desk that the
     patient is in the holding area.
     Verifies the surgical procedure, site, and surgeon verbally with the patient and/or family
     as appropriate. The surgical site is validated by observing the indelible ink of the
                                             263
     surgeon’s initials. Hospital policy is followed for identification of surgical sites that
     cannot be marked.
         i.   Reviews the patient’s surgical safety checklist completeness.
        ii.   Medical history and physical examination
       iii. Laboratory reports
       iv.    Consent forms and documentation of consents
        v.    Informed consent data
       vi.    General consent to treat
      vii.    Anesthesia consent
     viii. Measures the vital signs and blood pressure.
       ix. Verifies allergies and medication history.
        x. Checks skin tone and integrity.
       xi. Verifies physical limitations.
      xii. Notes the patient’s mental state.
     xiii. Puts a cap on the patient to protect his or her hair, for purposes of asepsis, and to
              help minimize hypothermia. Patients who are bald are required to wear a head
              covering to prevent heat loss and scalp dander shed.
     xiv. Notifies the individual at the surgery control desk when the patient is ready for
              transport to the OR. The patient is under constant observation by the patient care
              staff until transported from the surgical department to another patient care unit or
              discharged. The holding area nurse records pertinent findings in the perioperative
              patient care record and on the surgical checklist. If a perioperative patient
              assessment has not been performed, the holding area nurse will assess the patient,
              formulate the nursing diagnoses and expected outcomes, and prepare an
              individualized plan of care.
Preanesthesia Preparations
  The anesthesia provider or surgeon may wish to talk with the patient before sedation is
  given. The patient should be informed about all procedures before they are initiated. The
  following list of procedures may need to be completed before the induction of anesthesia;
  some or all of these procedures can be performed in the preoperative holding area if there
  are adequate facilities for patient privacy:
  i. Removal of body hair, if ordered.
 ii. Marking of surgical incision sites such as for plastic surgery of the face and torso.
iii. Before the Induction of Anesthesia, the anesthesia provider also has immediate
         preanesthesia duties, such as:
 o Checking and assembling equipment before the patient enters the room. Airways,
     endotracheal tubes, laryngoscopes, suction catheters, labeled prefilled medication
     syringes, and other items are arranged on a cart or table.
 o Reviewing the preoperative physical examination, history, and laboratory reports in the
     chart.

                                              264
o Making certain that the patient is comfortable and secure on the operating bed.
o Checking for denture removal or any loose teeth. The latter may be secured with a 2-0
  silk tie and taped to the patient’s cheek to prevent possible aspiration.
o Checking to be certain that contact lenses have been removed.
o Asking the patient when he or she last took anything by mouth, including medications.
o Checking the patient’s pulse, respiration, and blood pressure to obtain a baseline for the
  subsequent assessment of vital signs while the patient is anesthetized.
o Listening to the heart and lungs, and then connecting ECG monitor leads and attaching
  the pulse oximeter and other monitoring devices
o Starting the IV access. This may be done in the holding area or an induction room. Some
  patients arrive with an IV line in place.
o Preparing for and explaining the induction procedure to the patient. If properly
  premedicated, the patient should be able to respond to simple instructions.
  Wheeling of patients to the PT table
  Transportation to the Operating Room Suite Patients may be taken to the OR suite
  approximately 30 to 45 minutes before the scheduled time of the procedure. For safety
  they are commonly transported via a transport stretcher or wheelchair. If a stretcher is
  used, it should be pushed from the head end so the patient’s feet go first. Rapid
  movements through corridors and around corners may cause dizziness and nausea,
  especially if the patient has been medicated. The attendant at the head end can observe
  for vomiting or respiratory distress. The patient may be more comfortable if the head end
  of the stretcher is raised. If transporting by wheelchair, the patient should be instructed
  not to help with door opening and to keep hands on the lap. A blanket or sheet should be
  placed on the seat of the chair and a cover over the lap for modesty. It is inappropriate for
  bare buttocks to be seated on the uncovered surface of the wheelchair. Take care with
  tubing such as IVs or catheters so they do not get tangled in the wheels. Urinary drainage
  bags should be maintained below the level of the bladder to prevent reflux infection.
  Some ambulatory patients may be permitted to walk to the OR. They are given foot
  protection such as slippers to prevent injury. The slippers should be skid-proof on the
  bottom. Paper slippers may be unsafe. They do not protect from injury or slippage. The
  slippers may need to be removed for the procedure but should be retained until the end of
  the procedure and returned to the patient for use within the facility. Ideally certain
  elevators are designated “For OR Use Only,” which ensures privacy and minimizes
  microbial contamination.
  Transfer to the Operating Room When everything is ready the circulating nurse comes to
  the holding area for the patient. A hand-off report is given by the holding room nurse to
  the circulating nurse. The surgical checklist is one way to assure that an accurate
  exchange of information is given as patient care changes hands.
  The circulating nurse will in turn continue documenting on the checklist for continuity
  and relay the information to the PACU nurse when the surgical procedure is completed
                                            265
and patient care is transferred for post anesthesia recovery. It is advantageous if the
circulator is the perioperative nurse who made the preoperative visit; the patient will
appreciate seeing a familiar face. Before transporting the patient into the OR, the
circulating nurse has several important duties to fulfill:
 1. Greet the patient, and validate his or her identity
The circulating nurse should introduce himself or herself if he or she has not previously
met the patient. The patient should be addressed as Mr., Mrs., or Ms.—not by the first
name. It is appropriate to ask the patient to state and/or
Spell his or her name. The patient should be asked his or her full name and date of birth.
When the patient arrives at the facility, an identifying wristband is put on in the admitting
office. The holding room nurse checks the band before the patient leaves for the OR. The
circulating nurse compares the information on the wristband, including the identification
number, with the information on the medical record and with the information on the
surgical schedule: name, anticipated surgical procedure, time, and surgeon. An allergy
band and other notification band (e.g. Do Not Resuscitate [DNR]) should be checked at
the same time.
 Identification on the stretcher or bed ensures the patient’s return to the same stretcher or
bed after surgery, if this is the procedure. If the patient is an infant or child, the
identification bracelet may be on the ankle. Any tag on the crib should be out of his or
her reach. Always validate the identity of a child with a parent or legal guardian. Ask
what procedure is being performed. Validate the surgical site marking as appropriate.
Verification of the surgical procedure, site, and surgeon with the patient provides
reassurance that this is the correct patient. The patient’s own words should be
documented on the chart. The circulating nurse should note the presence of the surgeon’s
identifying mark on the surgical site. If the patient is heavily sedated, the surgeon may be
asked to help identify the patient.
 2. Check the side rails, restraining straps, IV infusions, and indwelling catheters.
 3. Observe the patient for any reaction to the medication.
 4. Observe the patient’s anxiety level.
 5. Check the history and physical data, laboratory tests, x-ray reports, and consent
form(s) or documentation in the patient’s medical record.
 6. Review the plan of care and the surgical checklist. Pay particular attention to allergies
and any previous unfavorable reactions to anesthesia or blood transfusions. b. Become
familiar with this patient’s unique and individual needs. The patient is taken into the OR
after the surgeon sees him or her and the anesthesia provider is ready to receive the
patient. The main preparations for the procedure should be complete so the circulating
nurse can devote undivided attention to the patient.
Positioning of patient on the PT table
Equipment for Positioning OR Bed Many different OR beds with suitable attachments are
available, and practice is necessary to master the adjustments. OR beds are versatile and
                                        266
     adaptable to a number of diversified positions for many surgical specialties; orthopedic,
     urologic, and fluoroscopic tables are often used for specialized procedures.


Figure 2: Diagram showing an operating table




Figure 3: Diagram showing an operating table with special attachments




                                             267
Special Equipment and Bed Attachments
The equipment used in positioning is designed to stabilize the patient in the desired
position and thus permit optimal exposure of the surgical site. All devices are clean, free
of sharp edges, and padded to prevent trauma or abrasion. Each OR bed has attachments
for specific purposes. Many positioning devices to protect pressure points and joints are
commercially available. If the devices are reusable, they are washable; some may be
terminally sterilized for asepsis between uses.

 Safety Belt (Thigh Strap). For restraint of leg movement during surgical procedures, a
sturdy, wide strap of durable material (e.g., nylon webbing, conductive rubber) is placed
and fastened over the thighs, above the knees, and around the surface of the OR bed.
Shoulder Bridge (Thyroid Elevator). When a shoulder bridge is used, the head section
is temporarily removed and a metal bar is slipped under the mattress between the head
and body sections of the OR bed. The bridge can be raised to hyperextend the shoulder or
thyroid area for surgical accessibility. This position can be achieved also by placing a
towel or blanket roll transversely under the shoulders, which causes the neck to
hyperextend. A perpendicular towel roll can be placed between the shoulders to cause the
shoulders to fall back bilaterally, which elevates the sternum.

                                        268
Shoulder Braces or Supports. Adjustable well-padded concave metal supports are
occasionally used to prevent the patient from slipping when the head of the OR bed is
tilted down, such as in the Trendelenburg’s position
Body Rests and Braces. Body rests and braces are made of metal and have a foam-
rubber or gel pad covered with conductive waterproof fabric. These devices are placed in
metal clamps on the side of the OR bed and are slipped in from the edge of the OR bed
against the body at various points to stabilize it in a lateral position.
Lateral Positioner (Kidney Rests). Kidney rests are concave metal pieces with grooved
notches at the base; they are placed under the mattress on the body elevator flexion of the
OR bed. They are slipped in from the edge of the OR bed and placed snugly against the
body for lateral stability in the side-lying kidney position. Although the kidney rest is
padded, care should be taken so that the upper edge of the rest does not press too tightly
against the body.
Body (Hip) Restraint Strap. With a body restraint strap, a wide belt with a padded
center portion (to protect the skin) is placed over the patient’s hips and secured with
hooks to the sides of the OR bed. This strap helps to hold the patient securely in the
lateral position. Some surgeons prefer to use 2-inch to 3-inch-wide bands of adhesive
tape to secure the shoulders and hips of patients in the lateral position. A towel can be
placed over the patient’s skin before the tape is applied.
Adjustable Arched Spinal Frame. An adjustable arched spinal frame consists of two
padded arches mounted on a frame that is attached to the OR bed. The patient is placed in
the prone position with the ventral surface of the abdomen over this device (referred to as
a Wilson frame). The pads extend from the shoulders to the thighs, with the abdomen
hanging dependently between the arches. The desired degree of flexion for spinal
procedures is achieved by adjusting the height of the arch by means of a crank. Other
types of prone positioning frames are available
Stirrups. Metal stirrup posts are placed in holders, one on each side rail of the OR bed, to
support the legs and feet in the lithotomy position. The feet are supported with canvas or
fabric loops that suspend the legs at a right angle to the feet. These stirrups are sometimes
called candy cane or sling stirrups
Metal Footboard. The footboard can be used flat as a horizontal extension of the OR bed
or raised perpendicular to the OR bed to support the feet, with the soles resting securely
against it. It is padded when the patient is placed in reverse Trendelenburg’s position. The
patient’s full body weight should not rest on the soles of the feet.
 Lift Sheet (Draw sheet). A double-layer sheet is placed horizontally across the top of a
clean sheet on the OR bed. After patients are transferred to the OR bed, their arms are
enclosed in the lower flaps of this sheet, with the palms against the sides in a natural
position and the fingers extended along the length of the body
Anterior chest, epigastrium, umbilicus, pelvis Laparoscopy


                                        269
Prepping and draping the patient
Draping is the procedure of covering the patient and surrounding areas with a sterile
barrier to create and maintain an adequate sterile field. An effective barrier eliminates or
minimizes passage of microorganisms between nonsterile and sterile areas.
 Criteria to be met in establishing an effective barrier are that the material must be:
 Blood and fluid resistant to keep drapes dry and prevent migration of microorganisms.
Material should be impermeable to moist microbial penetration (i.e., resistant to strike-
through) and resistant to tearing, puncture, or abrasion that causes fiber breakdown and
thus permits microbial penetration.
 Lint-free to reduce airborne contaminants and shedding into the surgical site. Cellulose
and cotton fibers can cause granulomatous peritonitis or embolize arteries.
 Antistatic to eliminate risk of a spark from static electricity. Material must meet
standards of the National Fire Protection Association.
 Sufficiently porous to eliminate heat buildup so as to maintain an isothermic
environment appropriate for the patient’s body temperature.
  Drapable to fit around contours of the patient, furniture, and equipment.
 Dull and non-glaring to minimize color distortion from reflected light.
 Free of toxic ingredients, such as laundry residues and nonfast dyes.
 Flame resistant to self-extinguish rapidly on removal of an ignition source. This is a
concern with use of lasers, ESUs, and other high-energy devices that provide an ignition
source at the sterile field. Drapes become fuel for a fire. Some materials are more
flammable than others; some are fire-retardant. Draping Materials Self-Adhering
Sheeting. Sterile, waterproof, antistatic, and transparent or translucent plastic sheeting
may be applied to dry skin. Incise Drape. The entire clear plastic drape has an adhesive
backing that is applied to skin. This may be applied separately, or the sheeting may be
incorporated into the drape sheet. The skin incision is made through the plastic.
Antimicrobial incise drapes have an antimicrobial agent impregnated in the adhesive or
the polymeric film. A film coated with an iodophor-containing adhesive, for example,
slowly releases active iodine during the surgical procedure to effectively inhibit
proliferation of organisms from the patient’s skin. The antimicrobial may be triclosan or
another agent that does not contain iodine. The skin may be prepped with alcohol and
allowed to dry before the drape is applied. Time is a factor in microbial accumulation
from resident bacteria. Antimicrobial incise drapes are used to sustain suppression,
particularly for procedures that last more than 3 hours.
Towel Drape. A nonwoven towel drape has a band of adhesive along one edge. Used as
a draping towel, it remains fixed on skin without towel clips. This is advantageous when
clips might obscure the view of a part exposed to x-rays during the surgical procedure. It
also is used to wall off a contaminated area, such as a stoma, from the clean skin area to
prevent spilling contents and causing infection or chemical irritation. Aperture Drape.
Adhesive surrounds a fenestration (opening) in the plastic sheeting. This secures the
                                        270
drape to the skin around the surgical site, such as an eye or ear. Caution is used in
applying this type of drape around the face of a patient who is awake. The patient must
have breathing space. If oxygen is used during a local procedure, it can build up under the
drape creating a fire hazard if cautery is used. Some patients experience claustrophobia.
Fabric towels may not feel as confining. Advantages of Self-Adhering Drape Material
 • Resident microbial flora from skin pores, sebaceous glands, and hair follicles cannot
migrate laterally to the incision.
 • Microorganisms do not penetrate the impermeable material.
 • Landmarks and skin tones are visible through the transparent plastic.
 • Inert adhesive holds drapes securely, eliminating the need for towel clips and possible
puncture of the patient’s skin.
 • Plastic sheeting conforms to body contours and has elasticity to stretch without
breaking its adhesion to skin. Some self-adhering drapes have sufficient moisture-vapor
permeability to reduce excessive moisture buildup that could macerate the skin or loosen
adhesive. A nonporous material should not cover more than 10% of the body surface
because it may interfere with the patient’s thermal regulatory mechanism of perspiration
evaporation. The heat-retaining property of plastic causes the patient to perspire
excessively, but its nonporous nature prevents evaporation. This material is used in the
following manner:
 1. The usual skin preparation is done.
 2. The scrubbed area must be dry. It may dry via evaporation, or excess solution may be
blotted with a towel.
 3. Transparent plastic material is applied firmly to the skin, with the initial contact along
the proposed line of incision. The drape is smoothed away from the incision area.
 4. Regular fabric drapes are applied over the plastic sheeting unless plastic is
incorporated into the fenestrated area of the drape. Nonwoven Disposable Drapes. Most
nonwoven disposable materials are compressed layers of synthetic fibers (i.e., rayon,
nylon, or polyester) combined with cellulose (wood pulp) and bonded together
chemically or mechanically without knitting, tufting, or weaving. This material may be
either nonabsorbent or absorbent. Polypropylene and foil also are used in some types.
Laser-Resistant Drape. Nonwoven drapes that contain cellulose ignite and burn easily.
Polypropylene drapes do not ignite, but they can melt. An aluminum-coated drape may
be safest for use with lasers, especially around the oxygen-enriched environment of the
head and neck area.
Thermal Drape. An aluminum-coated plastic body cover reflects radiant body heat back
to the patient to reduce intraoperative heat loss. A sterile, nonconductive, radiolucent
thermal drape may be used as the final drape. The patient may be wrapped in nonsterile
reflective covers (thermodrape) in the preoperative holding area. These may remain in
place through the surgical procedure under standard sterile drapes and during
postoperative recovery in the post anesthesia care unit (PACU
                                         271
Lap sheets with a vertical fenestration can be used in some spinal procedures. Specialty
lap sheets for cesarean sections may have an oval fenestration. Thyroid Sheet. The
thyroid sheet is the same size as a laparotomy sheet. The fenestration is transverse or
diamond shaped and is positioned closer to the top of the patient over the neck area.
Chest Sheet. The chest sheet is similar to a laparotomy sheet except that the fenestration
provides for a larger exposure. It is used for chest and breast procedures. Some chest
sheets have a horizontal fenestration.
Hip Sheet. The hip sheet is similar to the laparotomy sheet but somewhat longer to
completely cover the orthopedic fracture table. The fenestration may be oval and used in
conjunction with an impervious stockinette. Perineal Sheet. The perineal sheet is of
adequate size to create a sterile field with the patient in the lithotomy position. Some
styles have large leggings incorporated into it to cover the legs in stirrups. It may have
one or two openings to accommodate the perineum or rectum.
Laparoscopy Sheet. A laparoscopy sheet is a combination laparotomy and perineal
sheet. It is used for gynecologic laparoscopy in lithotomy or combined abdominoperineal
resection with the patient in the lithotomy position. The fenestrations are located on the
abdominal portion and the perineum.
Split Sheet. The split sheet is the same size as a laparotomy sheet. Rather than the sheet
being fenestrated, one end is cut longitudinally up the middle at least one third the length
of the sheet to form two free ends (tails). The upper end of this split may be in the shape
of a U.
Minor Sheet. The minor sheet is 36 × 45 inches (91 × 114 cm). It has many uses.
Wrapped around an extremity, it permits the extremity to remain on the sterile field for
manipulation during the surgical procedure. It is used under an arm to cover an arm board
for shoulder, axillary, arm, and hand procedures.
Medium Sheet. The medium sheet is about 36 × 72 inches (91 × 183 cm). It is used to
drape under legs, as an added protection above or below the surgical area, and for draping
areas in which a fenestrated sheet cannot be used.
Single Sheet. The single sheet is 108 × 72 inches (274 × 183 cm). Folded lengthwise, it
is placed above the sterile field to shield off the anesthesia provider and anesthesia
machine or other equipment near the patient’s head or sterile field. A single sheet also is
used to cover the patient and OR bed below the surgical area around the face.
Leggings. Leg drapes are supplied in pairs to cover the legs of a patient in the lithotomy
position. A rectangle, approximately 36 × 72 inches (91 × 183 cm), is closed on two sides
to form a tent like pocket.
Basic principles regarding draping are as follows:
     Place drapes on a dry area. The area around or under the patient may become
        damp from solutions used for skin preparation. The circulating nurse removes
        damp items or covers the area to provide a dry field on which to lay sterile drapes.
     Allow sufficient time to permit careful application.
                                        272
        Allow sufficient space to observe sterile technique. Do not reach across a
         nonsterile surface.
     Handle drapes as little as possible.
     Never reach across the OR bed to drape the opposite side; go around it.
     Take towels and towel clips, if used, to the side of the OR bed from which the
         surgeon is going to apply them before handing them up.
     Carry folded drapes to the OR bed. Watch the front of the sterile gown; it may
         bulge and touch the nonsterile OR bed or blanket on the patient. Stand well back
         from the nonsterile OR bed.
The draping procedure is as follows:
 1. The surgeon places a drape under the head while the circulating nurse or assistant
elevates the head. This drape consists of an open towel placed on a medium sheet. The
center of the towel edge is 2 inches (5 cm) in from the center of the sheet edge. The towel
is drawn up on each side of the face, over the forehead or at the hairline, and fastened
with a small non-perforating towel clip. This leaves the desired amount of the face
exposed.
 2. Hand up three additional towels and four towel clips. These towels frame the surgical
site.
 3. Place a medium sheet just below the site. This sheet must overlap the one under the
head.
 4. A fenestrated drape may be placed to complete draping.
 5. Cover the remainder of the foot of the OR bed, as necessary, with a single sheet. If
the patient is receiving inhalation anesthesia, use a minor sheet instead of a towel on a
medium sheet for the first drape under the head. A minor sheet is large enough to draw up
on each side of the face and to enclose the endotracheal tube and oropharyngeal
monitoring probes from the anesthesia machine for a considerable distance, thus keeping
them from contaminating the sterile field. If the surgical procedure on the face is
unilateral, the anesthesia provider may sit along the unaffected side, near the patient’s
head, with the anesthesia screen placed on the same side of the OR bed. Skin staples or
sutures may be used to affix towels around the contours of the face and neck of the
patient under general anesthesia. Each staple or stitch overlaps the skin and edge of the
drape. Eye. After skin preparation, the unaffected eye is protected by covering it with a
sterile eye pad before draping the patient. The draping procedure is as follows:
 1. The surgeon places two towels and a medium sheet under the head while the
circulating nurse holds the head up, as described for a face drape. One towel is drawn up
around the head, exposing only the eyebrow and affected eye, and fastened with a clip
without pressure on the eyes.
 2. Hand up four towels and towel clips to isolate the affected eye. Some surgeons prefer
a self-adhering aperture drape.

                                       273
 3. Cover the patient and remainder of the OR bed below the surgical area with a single
sheet. If local anesthetic will be administered, the drapes are raised off of the patient’s
nose and mouth to permit free breathing. A Mayo stand or anesthesia screen positioned
over the lower face before the draping is one method used to elevate the drapes. Oxygen,
6 to 8 L/min, can be supplied under the drapes via tube or nasal cannula. Take extreme
caution that oxygen does not build up under the drapes. An ignition source such as a
cautery or laser could spark a fire beneath the drapes.
For a microsurgical procedure, a sterile, padded, U-shaped steel wrist rest for the surgeon
and assistant is fastened to the head of the OR bed. Towels are put around the patient’s
head before the rest of the facial and body draping is completed. If irrigation will be used,
a plastic fenestrated drape is placed over the four towels to keep them dry if an aperture
drape is not preferred. Ear. The basic draping procedure is the same as for draping a face
or eye, except that only the affected ear is exposed. The head is turned toward the
unaffected side. Oxygen can be supplied under the drapes, as previously described. The
anesthesia provider is usually positioned at the side of the OR bed near the patient’s face.
Chest and Breast. While the arm is still being held up by the assistant after skin
preparation:
 1. Place a minor sheet on an arm board, under the patient’s arm, extending the sheet
under the side of the chest and shoulder. The prepped arm is lowered to the sterile draped
arm board. The distal portion of the arm may be encased in sterile stockinette so that the
arm can be manipulated during the surgical procedure.
 2. The patient’s body is draped with a sterile medium sheet.
 3. Hand up towels and towel clips; five or six are necessary.
 4. Apply a breast sheet so that the axilla is exposed for anticipated axillary dissection.
Many breast procedures require both breasts to be prepped and exposed for comparison
during the procedure. Shoulder. While the arm is still being held up by the assistant after
skin preparation:
 1. Place medium sheets over the chest and under the arm.
 2. Place a minor sheet under the shoulder and side of the chest.
 3. The surgeon outlines the surgical site with towels and secures them with clips.
 4. Place a minor sheet over the patient’s chest, covering the neck. Keep this sheet even
with the edge of the towel that borders the surgical site laterally.
 5. Wrap the arm in a minor sheet or encase it in a sterile stockinette, and secure it with a
sterile gauze or elastic bandage. At this point, a sterile team member relieves the unsterile
person who has been holding the arm.
 6. Place a medium sheet above the area, and secure these sheets together with towel
clips.
 7. A laparotomy or breast sheet may be used. Pull the arm through the opening. Or a
single sheet may be placed above the area, and the foot of the OR bed is covered with a


                                        274
medium sheet. Elbow. While the arm is still being held up by the unsterile assistant after
skin preparation:
 1. Place a sterile medium sheet across the chest and under the arm, up to the axilla.
 2. The surgeon defines the surgical area on the upper (proximal) arm by placing a towel
around the upper arm and securing it with a towel clip.
 3. Wrap the hand in a sterile towel. At this point, a sterile team member relieves the
unsterile person who has been holding the arm by grasping the wrapped hand,
maintaining the arm in an elevated position.
 4. The hand is grasped with a sterile stockinette, which is pulled down over the entire
arm toward the axilla, over the surgical site. An elastic bandage is wrapped around the
arm starting at the distal end (hand) to the proximal area (axilla).
 5. Place a medium sheet across the chest, on top of the arm, even with the towel on the
upper arm and covering it. Secure this sheet around the arm with a towel clip.
6. An extremity sheet is drawn over the hand and the arm. The extremity sheet is opened
in its entirety across the patient’s body. Hand. While the arm and hand are still being held
up after skin preparation:
 1. Place an impervious minor sheet, folded in half, on the extremity table.
 2. The surgeon places a towel around the lower arm, limiting the exposed area to the
affected hand, and secures it with a towel clip.
 3. Pull a stockinette over the hand and up over the length of the arm. At this stage in
draping, the unsterile person is relieved of holding the arm. The draped arm is laid on the
draped extremity table.
 4. Place a minor sheet across the extremity table just above the surgical site.
 5. Place an extremity sheet over the hand. Do not drop folds below the level of the arm
board. Open the sheet across the patient’s body toward the feet first. Attach the top end to
the IV poles at the head of the bed. Perineum. With the patient in the lithotomy position
for a genital, vaginal, or rectal procedure:
 1. Place a medium sheet under the buttocks. The circulating nurse can grasp the
underside and assist in placement. With the patient’s legs elevated in stirrups, this drape
hangs below the level of the OR bed and covers the lowered section of the OR bed.
 2. Slide leggings over each leg, protecting the gloved hands in the folded cuffs.
 3. The anus is covered if it is not part of the surgical site. An adhesive towel drape may
be used for this purpose.
 4. Place a medium sheet across the abdomen, from the level of the pubis, extending over
the anesthesia screen or attached to IV poles at the head of the bed.
 5. A fenestrated perineal sheet may be used rather than a medium sheet over the
abdomen. To use a perineal sheet with built-in leggings, hand one end of the sheet to the
assistant, opening out folds, and draw the leggings over the feet and legs simultaneously.
The hands are kept on the outside of the sheet to avoid contaminating the gloves and


                                        275
      gown. Hip. The patient is in a lateral position. If the leg will be manipulated during the
      surgical procedure, while the leg is still being held up after skin preparation:
       1. Place a medium sheet on the OR bed under the leg, up to the buttock.
       2. Place another medium sheet on the OR bed, overlapping the first one, to cover the
      unaffected leg. Some surgeons prefer to use an incise sheet or a lower extremity
      stockinette.
       3. The surgeon wraps the foot and leg with an elastic bandage, covering the stockinette.
      The leg, held up to this point, is laid on the OR bed.
       4. Place a minor sheet lengthwise of the OR bed on each side of the exposed area, even
      with the skin. The sheets under the leg and above the site do not overlap. Some surgeons
      prefer to draw the leg through the opening of a hip sheet or place a split sheet under the
      leg with the tails crossed over it toward the patient’s head.
       5. Place a medium sheet above the exposed area. Secure these last three sheets with
      towel clips.
       6. Place a single sheet above the surgical area and over the anesthesia screen. If
      manipulation of the leg is not necessary during the surgical procedure, drape the same as
      for a laparotomy, using a hip sheet instead of a laparotomy sheet.
Before the First Surgical Procedure of the Day
 The following housekeeping duties should be done before bringing sterile surgical supplies into
the room for the first case of the day:
 1. Remove unnecessary tables and equipment from the room. Arrange the appropriate furniture
in an organized manner away from the traffic pattern. Some head and neck procedures require
the OR bed to be oriented in a sideways direction to provide working space for the team. The
anesthesia provider might be positioned at the patient’s side.
 2. Damp-dust from the top down (with a facility-approved sporicidal disinfectant solution and
lint-free cloth) the overhead operating light, articulated arms, furniture, flat surfaces, and all
portable or mounted equipment. Avoid dry-dusting because this sets dust aloft. Start at higher
surfaces, and work down to lower levels because dust may fall from higher areas. “High touch”
areas such as knobs, handles, and keyboards must be cleaned after every patient.
 3. Damp-dust the tops and rims of the sterilizer and/or washer sterilizer and the countertops in
the sub sterile room adjacent to the OR.
 4. Visually inspect the room for dirt and debris. The floor may need to be damp-mopped.


Getting the Room Ready for the Next Patient
The cleaning procedures described provide adequate decontamination and terminal sterilization
after any surgical procedure. With a well-coordinated team, minimal turnover time between
surgical procedures can be accomplished. In an average time of 10 to 15 minutes, the room will
be ready for the next patient. The turnover time includes cleaning up after one procedure and
setting up for the next procedure. Additional equipment brought into the room for the next
patient should be damp-dusted with sporicidal disinfectant before entering the OR where sterile
                                              276
supplies are opened. Individual Patient Setups Each patient has a right to individual supplies
prepared just for him or her. Sterile supplies should not be opened until they are ready to be
used. Case cart systems and the use of custom packs eliminate the need for preparing the sterile
field several hours ahead of the patient’s arrival. The scrub person, working with an efficient
circulating nurse, should have time to set up the instrument table immediately before each
surgical procedure. There is no arbitrary life span of a setup table once it is open and prepared
as a sterile field for a patient. Sterility is event related, not time related. The sterile table must
be under surveillance at all times. Unless it is under constant surveillance, sterility of any setup
cannot be guaranteed. If a scheduled surgical procedure is delayed and a sterile setup has not
been contaminated by the patient’s presence in the room, the setup may remain open, under
surveillance by someone in the room, with the doors closed. Taping the door shut has no
assurance of sterility of the setup. The setup should be used as close to the time of preparation
as possible. If a patient is taken into the OR and for some reason the surgical procedure is
canceled before the procedure has begun, the tables should be torn down and the room cleaned
as if the surgical procedure had taken place. The setup is considered potentially contaminated
and may not be saved for another patient. Disposable items may be useful for the clinical
educator in the department during orientation and education sessions.
Aseptic Technique
It is impossible to exclude all microorganisms from the environment, but for the safety of both
patients and personnel, every effort is made to minimize and control these microorganisms.
Microorganisms are present in the air and on animate and inanimate objects at all times. To
effectively apply the principles of asepsis, environmental control, and sterile techniques
discussed in this chapter, the meaning of terms related to aseptic technique must first be
understood. Therefore the basis of prevention is the knowledge of causative agents and their
control, as well as the principles of aseptic and sterile techniques. The methods by which
microbial contamination is contained in the environment are referred to as aseptic technique.
The OR in the restricted area is aseptic at best because the room and air cannot ever be 100%
free of microbial content. Some key elements of asepsis include the following facts:
    Aseptic technique is sometimes referred to as clean technique.
    Items have been cleaned and decontaminated so they are safe to handle with clean, bare
       hands.
    Items in use in patient care are handled with examination gloves for the protection of
       both the caregiver and the patient.
    Items have been cleaned, decontaminated, disinfected, or terminally sterilized without a
       wrapper, and stored in a clean, dry place.
    Items may start out sterile but are not maintained or used under sterile conditions. Skin
       preps may be packaged sterile, but skin cannot be sterilized. The process is aseptic.
    Contamination is contained. Extraneous contamination is avoided.
    Items are set up on clean towels or drapes and used with examination gloves.
    Items are not sterile or maintained sterile during use. Extraneous contamination is
       avoided.
                                               277
     Disposable items are not cleaned and reused for another patient.
     Items are classified as semi critical or noncritical by Spaulding’s classification of the
      importance of patient care items.
   Items can be used outside the confines of the restricted area.
   Items are used on intact skin or mucous membranes.
   Items are not used when the patient’s vascular system will be entered.
Sterile Technique
Sterile technique incorporates many processes associated with asepsis but to a higher, more
controlled degree. In sterile technique all microorganisms must be maintained at an irreducible
minimum meaning as low as absolutely possible. Keep in mind that a sealed sterile package
must be opened at some point during patient care to use the contents. That means opening the
package to the room air. Even in the restricted area the room air has a microbial count that we
cannot eliminate. We try as hard as possible to minimize the room traffic and maintain
environmental controls to maintain the sterile field. Essential elements of sterile technique
include the following factors:
   Items are used only in a sterile field in the restricted area.
   Items are used by sterile team members wearing appropriate sterile attire.
   Items are used in areas of the patient’s body where the site has been prepped.
   Items may be used in invasive surgery.
   Items may be used in body areas with non-intact skin and membranes and may enter the
      patient’s vascular system.
   Items are classified as critical according to Spaulding’s level of importance of patient
      care items.
   Items have been cleaned, decontaminated, and packaged before sterilization.
   Items processed by sterilization are stored wrapped and remain so until use by a sterile
      team member.
   Items are for individual patient use only. Reusable items can be reprocessed and
      resterilized for use with another patient. Disposable items are discarded after use. If
      opened and unused, disposable items are discarded.
   Items that become contaminated are discarded and replaced immediately.


Principles of Sterile Technique Sterile technique is the foundation of modern surgery
 The patient is the center of the sterile field, which includes the personnel wearing sterile attire
and the areas of the patient, operating bed, and furniture that are covered with sterile drapes.
The level of the surgical site is the central focus of the level of the sterile field. Strict adherence
to the recommended practices of sterile technique reflects the surgical conscience of the
perioperative team and is mandatory for the safety of the patient and personnel in the
environment. The principles of sterile technique are applied under the following conditions:
   In preparation for an invasive procedure by sterilization of necessary materials and
     supplies
                                                278
     In preparation of the sterile team to handle sterile supplies and intimately contact the
      surgical site by scrubbing, gowning, and gloving
   In the creation and maintenance of the sterile field, including skin preparation and
      draping of the patient
   In the maintenance of sterility throughout the entire surgical procedure; breaches in
      sterility are remedied immediately
   In terminal decontamination, disinfection, and sterilization at the conclusion of the
      surgical procedure only sterile items are used within the sterile field Items such as sterile
      instrument sets, drapes, sponges, and basins are obtained from the sterile core. Only if
      absolutely necessary, items such as unwrapped instruments may be steam sterilized
      immediately before the surgical procedure and taken directly from the sterilizer to the
      sterile field. This rapid steam sterilization method is referred to as flashing and should be
      used only if no other alternative is available. Most facilities keep a record of each time
      flashing is used. Every person who dispenses a sterile item to the field must be sure of its
      initial and continued sterility until used. Proper packaging, sterilizing, delivery to the
      field, and handling should provide such assurance. If there is any doubt about the sterility
      of any item, it should be considered unsterile and therefore should not be used. The
      phrase “when in doubt, throw it out” applies to this situation. Examples of questionably
      sterile items include, but are not limited to, the following situations:
   If a sterilized package is found in a contaminated area (e.g., the general unsterile
      workroom, the locker room)
   If uncertain about the actual timing or operation of the sterilizer. Items processed in a
      suspect load are considered unsterile. Other items processed in that load may need to be
      recalled to the processing department for reprocessing (e.g., the external process monitor
      has irregular color changes).
   If an unsterile person or object comes into close contact with a sterile table and vice versa
   If a sterile table or unwrapped sterile items are not under constant observation (e.g., a
      sterile field under a table cover is not directly visible)
   If the integrity of the packaging material is not intact
   If a sterile package wrapped in a material other than plastic or another moisture-resistant
      barrier becomes damp or wet. Humidity in the storage area or moisture on hands may
      seep into the package.
   If a sterile package wrapped in a previous woven material drops to the floor or other area
      of questionable cleanliness. These materials allow the implosion of air into the package.
      A dropped package is considered contaminated on the outside. If the wrapper is
      impervious and the area of contact is dry and intact, the outer wrapper is removed and
      item may be transferred to the sterile field. Packages that have been dropped on the floor
      should not be put back into sterile storage.
Sterile Personnel Are Gowned and Gloved
 Gowns are considered sterile only from the chest to the level of the sterile field in the front, and
from 2 inches above the elbows to the cuffs on the sleeves. When wearing a gown, only the area
that can be seen in front down to the level of the sterile field should be considered sterile. Keep
                                               279
in mind that the level of the patient’s surgical site actually establishes the level of the sterile
field Usually this does not extend below waist level. The following practices are observed:
 Self-gowning and gloving should be done from a separate sterile surface to avoid dripping water
onto sterile supplies or a sterile table. Closed gloving technique is preferred for the person who
is establishing the sterile field and gowning and gloving others.
 The stockinette cuffs of the gown are enclosed beneath sterile gloves. The stockinette is
absorbent and retains moisture; therefore this part of the gown does not provide a microbial
barrier and permits the transfer of microorganisms. Once the cuff has been contained within the
closed glove, it should not be pulled back over the hand for any regloving procedure because it
is contaminated. Regloving should be performed using the open assisted gloving technique.
Another sterile team member can assist with this process as necessary.
   Sterile people must keep their hands in sight at all times and at or above waist level or the
      level of the sterile field.
   Hands are kept away from the face and the elbows are kept close to the sides. The hands
      are never folded under the arms because of perspiration in the axillary region. The
      neckline, shoulders, and back also may become contaminated with perspiration. The back
      of the gown is not under constant observation and therefore is considered contaminated.
   Sterile people are aware of the height of team members in relation to each other and the
      sterile field. Changing levels at the sterile field is avoided. All team members must be
      aware of spatial relationships at all times. The gown is considered sterile only down to
      the highest level of the sterile working field. If a sterile person must stand on a platform
      to reach the surgical site, the standing platform should be positioned before this person
      steps up to the draped area. Sterile personnel should sit only when the entire
   Tables Are Sterile Only at Table Level Because tables are sterile only at table level, OR
      personnel must adhere to the following procedures:
   Only the top of a sterile, draped table is considered sterile. The edges and sides of the
      drape extending below table level are considered contaminated. The Mayo stand, when
      covered by a sterile drape, may be placed over the sterile field. Minimal contact is had
      with the underside of the Mayo drape.
   Anything falling or extending over the table or OR bed edge, such as a piece of suture or
      suction tip, is contaminated. The scrub person does not touch the part hanging below the
      level of the established sterile field.
   When unfolding or applying a sterile drape, it is unfolded away from the sterile person
      and the part that drops below the table surface is not brought back up to table level. Once
      placed, the drape is not moved or shifted.
   Cords, tubing, and other materials are secured on the sterile field with a non-perforating
      clip to prevent them from sliding over the edge of the operating bed.
   Sterile Personnel Touch Only Sterile Items or Areas; Unsterile Personnel Touch Only
      Unsterile Items or Areas
   Sterile team members maintain contact with the sterile field by means of sterile gowns
      and gloves.
   The unsterile circulating nurse does not directly contact the sterile field.
                                              280
   Supplies are brought to sterile team members and opened by the circulating nurse using
    aseptic technique. The circulating nurse ensures a sterile transfer to the sterile field. Only
    sterile items touch sterile surfaces.
   Unsterile Personnel Avoid Reaching Over the Sterile Field; Sterile Personnel Avoid
    Leaning Over an Unsterile Area
   The unsterile circulating nurse never reaches over a sterile field to transfer sterile items.
   The circulating nurse holds only the lip of the bottle over the basin when pouring solution
    into a sterile basin to avoid reaching over a sterile area (Fig. 15-5). He or she should
    avoid making contact with the bottle and the basin and avoid splashing solutions. The
    entire contents of the bottle should be dispensed in one pouring motion. If some of the
    solution is not poured, it is considered contaminated and may not be recapped for later
    use or dispensed to another sterile basin. Once the cap is off the solution is considered
    contaminated.
   The unsterile solution may be saved for cleaning the patient’s skin after the incision is
    dressed and the surgical site is undraped.
   The scrub person sets basins or medicine cups to be filled at the edge of the sterile table;
    the circulating nurse stands a safe distance away from the edge of the table to fill them.
    Medications are drawn up in a syringe, the needle is removed, and the drug is dispensed
    to the cup without aerosolization. It is unsafe to draw up a drug if another person is
    holding the bottle. This is no different from recapping a needle by hand. It is not advised
    to dispense the drug via syringe and needle because the needle could cause an
    aerosolization of a drug to which a team member might be sensitive.
   The team uses sterile light handles for manipulation and adjustment of the surgical lights.
    Light handles should not be placed until after the patient is fully draped.
   The surgeon or team member steps away from the sterile field to have perspiration
    removed from the brow.
   The scrub person drapes an unsterile table by: Unfolded drape. Placing the drape over the
    unsterile surface nearest himself or herself first and carefully completing the coverage of
    the far side. This protects the front of the gown from coming into contact with the
    unsterile surface being covered. Gloved hands are protected by cuffing a drape over
    them.
   Folded drape. Unfolding toward self-first to protect the gown when working with a
    folded drape through). When completing the coverage, the rest of the drape is unfolded
    away from self.
    The scrub person stands back from the unsterile table when draping it to avoid leaning
    over an unsterile area. The Edges of Anything That Encloses Sterile Contents Are
    Considered Unsterile The boundaries between sterile and unsterile areas are not always
    rigidly defined (e.g., the edges of wrappers on sterile packages and the caps on solution
    bottles). The following precautions should be taken:
   Sterile Areas Are Continuously Kept in View Inadvertent contamination of sterile areas
    must be readily visible. To ensure this principle, the following steps must be taken:
   Sterile personnel face sterile areas.
                                             281
     Someone must remain in the room to maintain vigilance when sterile packs are opened in
      a room or a sterile field is set up. Sterility cannot be ensured without direct observation.
      An unguarded sterile field should be considered contaminated.
   Sterile Personnel Keep Well Within the Sterile Area Sterile persons allow a wide margin
      of safety when passing unsterile areas and observe the following rules:
   Sterile personnel stand back at a safe distance from the OR bed when draping the patient.
   Sterile personnel pass each other back to back at a 360-degree turn (Fig. 15-10).
   Sterile personnel turn their backs to an unsterile person or area when passing.
   Sterile personnel face a sterile area to pass it.
   Sterile personnel ask an unsterile individual to step aside rather than risk contamination.
   Sterile personnel stay within the sterile field. They do not walk around or go outside the
      room.
   Movement within and around a sterile area is kept to a minimum to avoid contamination
      of sterile items or personnel. Sterile Personnel Keep Contact with Sterile Areas to a
      Minimum To keep contact with the sterile areas to a minimum, sterile personnel observe
      the following rules:
   Sterile personnel do not lean on sterile tables or the draped patient. Leaning on the patient
      can cause injury to tissues and structures.
   Sitting or leaning against an unsterile surface is a break in technique. If the sterile team
      sits to operate, they do so without proximity to unsterile areas.
   Unsterile Personnel Avoid Sterile Areas Unsterile personnel maintain an awareness of
      sterile, unsterile, clean, and contaminated areas and their proximity to each. They must be
      aware of their closeness to the sterile field. A wide margin of safety must be maintained
      when passing sterile areas by observing the following rules:
          Unsterile personnel maintain a distance of at least 1 foot (30 cm) from any area of
              the sterile field.
          Unsterile personnel face and observe a sterile area when passing it to be sure they
              do not touch it.
          Unsterile personnel never walk between two sterile areas (e.g., between sterile
              instrument tables).
The integrity of a sterile package and the appearance of the process monitor must be checked
for sterility just before opening. To ensure sterility, the following precautions should be taken:
   Sterile packages are laid only on dry surfaces.
   If a sterile package wrapped in absorbent material becomes damp or wet, it is discarded
      or wrapped in fresh wrappers
Learning outcome 3: Wind-Up Perioperation Theatre Clinical Services
Introduction to the learning outcome
This learning outcome involves re-arranging the Operation theatre, documentation of patients’
condition, specimen handling, decontamination, types of wastes in Operation Theatre and
respective disposal methods and last offices services in Operation Theatre
1.2.3 Performance Standard

                                              282
 1. Operation room is reorganized for the next procedure in accordance to Standard
     Operation Procedures
 2. Documentation is carried out according to work place policy and WHO
 3. Waste is disposed with due regard to environment protection regulations
1.2.4 Information Sheet
Definition of key terms
PACU - Post Anesthesia Care Unit
Content/methods/illustrations
Re-arranging the Operation Theatre
After the Surgical Procedure Is Complete the scrub person will apply the dressing after the
incision is cleaned and dried. The drapes will be rolled off the patient as a sterile team member
holds the dressing in place. Clean the surrounding area of the patient’s body before securing the
dressing(s) over the surgical wound and the surgical drainage systems. Put a clean, warm gown
and blanket on the patient. Place the safety belt over top of the blanket. It needs to be seen at all
times. Open the neck and back closures of the surgeon’s and assistants’ gowns so they can
remove them without contaminating themselves. Have a patient care assistant bring in the clean
transport cart or bed. Check the patient’s name on the stretcher or bed if it is the procedure to
return the patient to the same one used for transport to the OR suite. Align the cart with the OR
bed, and lock the wheels. Remove the leg safety belt. A lifting frame or patient roller is a great
help in moving unconscious and obese patients. The Davis patient roller consists of a series of
rollers that are mounted in a frame long enough to accommodate the trunk of an adult patient.
The edge of the roller is placed under the lift sheet and the patient’s side. With the patient’s head
and feet supported by separate team members, the lift sheet is pulled and the patient is rolled
onto the stretcher or bed. A minimum of four people is required to safely move the patient with
this device: one to lift the head and manage the airway (usually the anesthesia provider), one to
lift the feet and control the Foley catheter, one beside the stretcher or bed to pull, and one beside
the patient to lift him or her from the OR bed. The action of all four people should be
synchronized, and the count of three is called by the person controlling the head, usually the
anesthesia provider. The following precautions should be taken in lifting or rolling an
unconscious patient:
 1. Protect the IV, drains, and urinary drainage bag. Secure IV solution bags on an IV pole. It is
preferable to attach the IV pole near the foot end of the stretcher or bed, where there is less
danger of injury to the patient if the bag or IV pole should fall or break.
 2. Use the lift sheet to support the arms at the sides so the arms do not dangle.
 3. The anesthesia provider guards the head and neck from injury and calls the count for the
move.
 4. Lift or roll the patient gently and slowly to avoid circulatory depression. After the patient is
safely on the transport cart, remove the lift sheet by logrolling the patient gently from side to
side. Brush burns result if the fabric is pulled from under the patient. Place the patient in a
comfortable position that is most conducive to the maintenance of respiration and circulation.
                                               283
The appropriate position may vary with the type of surgical procedure; usually the patient
should:
 • Be supine after a laparotomy, with the head of the stretcher elevated 15 degrees, especially if
he or she is still intubated
 • Be semi prone after a tonsillectomy, for drainage, if extubated
 • Be lateral, on the affected side, after transthoracic surgical procedures, thus splinting the side,
usually extubated
 • Have the affected extremity supported on a pillow Raise the side rails before the patient is
transported out of the OR. Be sure the completed chart and proper records accompany the
patient, and send other supplies as indicated (tracheostomy obturator). Help transport the patient
to the PACU or patient care unit. Patient Transfer from the Operating Room During transport,
the patient should be constantly observed by someone familiar with his or her condition. If the
patient has had local anesthesia, the circulating nurse and transporter may accompany the patient
during the return to an ambulatory unit. Hand-Off Report to PACU Nurse If the patient has had
general anesthesia, the anesthesia provider and circulating nurse should accompany him or her
during transport to the PACU, where they give a verbal hand-off report to the PACU nurse. This
postoperative report is important for the continuity of care. A concise verbal report from the
anesthesia provider and/or circulating nurse includes the following:
 • Name and age of the patient
 • Type of surgical procedure and name of the surgeon
 • Type of anesthesia and name of the anesthesia provider
 • Vital signs (baseline, preoperative, and intraoperative), including current body temperature.
Body weight should be available in kilograms.
Types and locations of drains, packing, and dressings. Closure medium should be included.
 • Preoperative level of consciousness and current status
 • Medications given preoperatively and intraoperatively, as well as those regularly taken by
prescription or self-medication
 • Medical and surgical history
 • Allergies and responses to allergens, substance sensitivity
 • Positioning on the OR bed and devices attached to the skin
 • Complications during the surgical procedure
 • Intake and output, including IV fluids, blood, and urinary output
 • Location of the waiting family or significant others • Special considerations: • Sensory and/or
physical impairments; eyewear, hearing aids, dentures, or other personal property brought to the
OR is returned to the patient when the level of consciousness is appropriate • Language barrier
and level of understanding • Use of tobacco, alcohol, and/or addictive drugs • Orders such as
“no code,” “do not resuscitate (DNR),” or “do not attempt resuscitation”
Sponge, Sharps, and Instrument Counts The counting of sponges, needles and other sharps, and
instruments has been mentioned throughout this chapter. These supplies are crucial to the
surgical procedure and must be accounted for throughout every procedure, regardless of size or
function. Items are counted before and after use. The types and numbers of sponges, needles
                                               284
and other sharps, and instruments vary for each surgical procedure. The process of counting
gives the circulating nurse and the scrub person the opportunity to look at all the supplies and
the entire instrument set before the procedure begins. Missing or defective items can be obtained
or replaced without interrupting the continuity of the surgery. Accountability for counts is a
professional responsibility that rests primarily on the scrub person and the circulating nurse. The
surgeon and patient rely on the accuracy of this accountability by the team. There are several
reasons why it is important for the scrub person and circulating nurse to count and be
accountable for all items used during the procedure. Counts are performed for patient and
personnel safety, infection control, and inventory purposes. A retained surgical item in the
surgical site after closure is a possible cause for a lawsuit after a surgical procedure. A retained
foreign object made of woven textile is referred to as a gossypiboma or a textiloma. A foreign
body unintentionally left in a patient can be the source of wound infection or disruption.
 The longer the object remains in the body, the more it incorporates ingrowth of tissue. An
abscess can form, and fistulas may develop between organs. The foreign body reaction may be
immediate or may be delayed for years. Diagnosis is sometimes difficult and costly, and removal
of the object usually requires major surgery. The literature reports the removal of some retained
sponges through laparoscopic surgery if they are discovered before adhesions develop.
A contaminated sponge or needle that is unaccounted for at the close of the procedure could also
inadvertently come into contact with the personnel who clean the room, process instruments,
launder the linens, or transport the trash. Blood or body fluids are sources of pathogens such as
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or hepatitis B virus (HBV). A surgical pattie (cottonoid)
that has become saturated with clear cerebrospinal fluid during a neurologic case may also be
contaminated with Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD). Inventory control is monitored by
accounting for the instrument set in its entirety. Counting ensures that expensive instruments
such as towel clips and scissors are not accidentally thrown away or discarded with the drapes.
Injury to laundry and housekeeping/environmental services personnel by the contaminated sharp
edges of surgical instruments, blades, and needles is a risk. Surgical instruments also can cause
major damage to equipment in the laundry services. Unfortunately, some facilities have felt a
need to install metal detectors in the trash and soiled linen areas to monitor for missing
instruments. Counting Procedures a counting procedure is a method of accounting for items put
on the sterile table for use during the surgical procedure. Sponges, sharps, and instruments
should be counted and/or accounted for on all surgical procedures. This includes any materials
introduced into the patient during the procedure, such as rectal or vaginal packs or sterile towels
used to pack off or retain viscera. Inadvertent items such as injection needle caps, cautery tip
cleaners, clip cartridges, or suture reels could become retained objects and should be accounted
for in their entirety. Items used during organ procurement procedures should be accounted for
in their entirety in the same manner as for any surgical procedure. Respect for the donor should
be as important to the surgical team as respect for any patient. Initial Count When the Instrument
Tray Is Assembled. The person who assembles and wraps items for sterilization will count them
in standardized multiple units and initial the baseline set contents. Most facilities enclose a copy
of this tray inventory count sheet in the instrument set or attach a copy to the outer wrapper. The
                                              285
effects of enclosing a tray inventory sheet inside the set raises questions of potential exposure
of toner and foreign body reaction in the patient. Methods for attaching the tray sheet to the
outside of the set should be explored if this is a concern. In commercially prepackaged sterile
items (e.g., sponges, disposable towels), this count is performed by the manufacturer and affixed
to the outside of the package. Baseline count during Setup for the Surgical Procedure. The scrub
person and the circulating nurse together count all items before the surgical procedure begins
and during the surgical procedure as each additional package is opened and added to the sterile
field. These initial counts provide the baseline for subsequent counts. Any item intentionally
placed in the wound, such as towels, is recorded. A useful method for counting is as follows:
 1. As the scrub person touches each item, he or she and the circulating nurse number each item
aloud until all items are counted.
 Reversal agents and their roles
   Flumazenil, reverses the effects of benzodiazepines
   Naloxone, reverses the effects of opioids
   Neostigmine, helps reverse the effects of non-depolarizing muscle relaxants
   Sugammadex, new agent that is designed to bind Rocuronium therefore terminating its
      action

The following are activities/responsibilities of the scrub person at the end of the case:

 1. Push the Mayo stand and instrument table away from the OR bed as soon as the dressing is
applied and the drapes are removed. Roll drapes off the patient from head to foot to prevent
airborne contamination; do not pull them off.
 2. Check drapes for towel clips, instruments, and other items. Be sure that no equipment is
discarded with disposable drapes or sent to the laundry. Disposable drapes are placed in a red
biohazard container for disposal. Soiled drapes, whether disposable or reusable, should be
handled as little as possible and with minimum agitation to prevent gross microbial
contamination of air by dispersal of lint and debris.
 3. Discard soiled sponges, other biologically contaminated waste, and disposable items in red
biohazard containers. Discard unused sponges, nonwoven drapes, and other disposable waste
into the main trash.
 4. Dispose of sharp items safely. Special care should be taken in handling all knife blades,
trocars, burrs and bits, surgical needles, and needles used for injection or aspiration. Remove
the tip from the ESU handle (pencil). A self-closing adhesive pad or box designed for this
purpose is the safest device to use. A safe disposal procedure should be implemented and
sustained. Place these items in an appropriate rigid, puncture-resistant container for safe disposal
to prevent injury and potential risk of contamination. The primary cause of accidental cuts and
punctures to personnel, both inside and outside the OR, is disposal of surgical sharps at the end
of the surgical procedure. Adherence to standardized systems designed specifically for safe
handling and disposal of sharps prevents virtually all accidental cuts, punctures, and lacerations.
Unused suture packets are discarded.

                                              286
 5. Basins and trays too large for the case cart are put into plastic bags for transport to the
decontamination area. The Mayo tray may be included at some facilities. Place these on the
lower shelf of the case cart.
 6. The instruments are opened completely and placed into the wire mesh basket with all box
locks spread apart. Blood, tissue, bone, and any other gross debris are removed from instruments
during the case as much as possible. All instruments, used and unused, must be decontaminated,
terminally sterilized, or undergo high-level disinfection (as appropriate) before they are
processed for reuse. Instruments should be presoaked and/or pre-rinsed before processing in a
washer-sterilizer or decontaminator. Some facilities have the scrub person spray enzymatic foam
over the instruments to start the cleaning process. Any biologic material remaining on
instruments is more difficult to remove after the instruments have been heat-sterilized because
the material becomes baked on them. The biologic debris inhibits sterilization and disinfection
processes. a. Remove knife blades from handles using a heavy hemostat; never use fingers.
Using a needle holder can cause the jaws of the instrument to become misaligned. Point the
blade toward the table and away from the field and other people in the area so that if it breaks
or slips it will not fly across the room. b. Unloaded scalpel handles and other instruments with
sharp tips or edges, such as scissors, should be placed in a container separate from the other
instruments so they can be easily identified by the processing personnel. Do not put knife
handles in an instrument tray with blades left on them. Other instruments designed for
replaceable cutting blades, such as dermatomes, should have blades removed; thereafter they
may be handled with other instruments. Place reusable surgical needles, either on a needle
rack or loose, into a perforated stainless steel box to be decontaminated and sterilized with the
instruments.
 7. Dispose of solutions and suction bottle contents in a flushing hopper connected to a sanitary
sewer. Wear PPE to protect from splashes. Some facilities have closed system liquid waste
disposal units that empty suction canisters and decontaminate the contents. Disposable suction
units simplify disposal. Commercial substances can be added to liquid in the disposable canister
to solidify or gel contents for solid waste disposal.
 8. The scrub person removes gown and gloves before taking the case cart to the processing
area. The gown is removed first before removing gloves. The circulating nurse unfastens neck
and back closures. Protect arms and scrub clothes from the contaminated outside of the gown.
The gown is turned inside out as it is removed to prevent contamination of the scrub suit. Discard
the gown in a laundry hamper if it is reusable or in a trash receptacle if it is disposable. To
remove gloves, use a glove-to-glove and then skin-to-skin technique to protect the hands from
the contaminated outside of gloves. Turn gloves inside out as they are removed to contain the
biologic contamination, and then discard them into a trash receptacle. Wash hands after
removing gloves.
 9. The case cart should be totally enclosed or covered in plastic before taking it to the
decontamination and processing area. Fresh examination gloves are worn when transporting the
case cart.


                                             287
Room Turnover Activities by the Team After the patient leaves, the environmental service
personnel should be available to perform room cleaning. Regardless of which member of the
team performs them, specific functions should be performed to complete the between case room
cleanup. The following personnel and areas are considered contaminated during and after the
surgical procedure:
 • Members of the sterile team, until they have discarded their gowns, gloves, caps, masks, and
shoe covers. These items remain in the contaminated area; scrub clothes are changed if they are
wet or contaminated.
 All furniture, equipment, and the floor within and around the perimeter of the sterile field. If
accidental spillage has occurred in other parts of the room, these areas are also considered
contaminated.
 All anesthesia equipment.
 Stretchers used to transport patients and patient moving devices. These should be cleaned after
each patient use. Clean examination gloves are worn to complete the room cleanup.
Decontamination of the environment includes the following tasks starting at the highest point
and working down:
 Overhead operating light. Wipe overhead lights with a clean cloth that has been wetted with
sporicidal disinfectant solution specifically intended to prevent clouding of the surface that can
cause dullness and glare. Lights and overhead tracks become contaminated quickly and present
a possible hazard from fallout of dust particles onto sterile surfaces or into wounds during
surgical procedures.
Furniture. Wash horizontal surfaces of all tables and equipment, including the anesthesia
machine, with a sporicidal disinfectant. Apply disinfectant from a squeeze-bottle dispenser, and
wipe with a clean cloth or a disposable wipe that is changed frequently. Spray bottles can cause
particles to become aerosolized and should be avoided.2 All surfaces of mattress, pads, and
screw connections of the OR bed are included. Safety straps should be cleaned between patients.
Velcro straps can be laundered according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Mobile
furniture can be pushed through sporicidal disinfectant solution used for floor care to clean
casters. Excess strands of loose suture should be removed from the wheels. Knobs, machine
controls, keyboards, cabinet handles, and other frequently touched surfaces must be cleaned
with sporicidal disinfectant between patients.
Anesthesia equipment. Most masks and anesthesia tubing are disposable. Any reusable
anesthesia masks and tubing are cleaned and sterilized between patient uses. Some of this
equipment can be steam-sterilized; if not, it may be sterilized by ethylene oxide gas and aerated
before reuse. If this method is not available, items should be chemically sterilized according to
the sterilant manufacturer’s recommendations.
 Laryngoscope blades and handles should be disassembled, thoroughly decontaminated, and
disinfected. Any parts that can tolerate a sterilization process should be terminally sterilized.
 Noncritical items, such as blood pressure cuffs, should be cleaned with an approved sporicidal
disinfectant between patient uses.


                                              288
Laundry. After all cleaning procedures have been completed, discard cleaning cloths or put into
a laundry bag if they are not disposable. When all reusable woven fabric items, used and unused,
have been placed inside the laundry bag, close it securely. To help protect laundry personnel, an
alginate bag that dissolves in hot water may be used as the primary laundry bag or as a liner
within a cloth bag. Transport reusable woven fabrics soiled with blood or body fluids in leak-
proof bags.
Trash. Collect all trash in plastic or impervious bags, including disposable drapes and kick
bucket and wastebasket liners. Bags should be sturdy to resist bursting or tearing during
transport. Trash can be separated into biohazardous waste, noninfectious trash, and recyclable
items. Separate receptacles for each type of trash should be available. Disposition of potentially
infectious waste must comply with local, state, and/or federal leak-proof regulations for
contamination control measures. Use appropriately labeled and color-coded bags for infectious
waste, and use puncture-resistant containers for sharps.
Floors. Clean a perimeter of 3 to 4 feet in circumference of the surgical field between cases.
This perimeter expands from the clean area to dirty area—in the direction of visible soilage. Hot
water may hasten the biocidal/sporicidal action of the disinfectant agent but may also soften tile
adhesive. Standing platforms (step stools) are considered part of the floor and should be cleaned
between cases.
 Mops. Fresh, clean mops are used with fresh Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)–
registered sporicidal disinfectant solution. The floor can be flooded with fresh detergent-
disinfectant solution. A fresh mop is used to apply solution and used to take up solution
beginning in the cleanest area and working toward the dirtiest areas. After one-time use, remove
mop heads and place in a laundry hamper with other contaminated reusable woven fabrics. Mop
handles should be cleaned with disinfectant after use and stored in the housekeeping storage
area until they are needed again. Use clean mops and sporicidal disinfectant solution for each
cleanup procedure. Wet vacs can be used to clean the OR flooring. The wet vac unit should be
cleaned and disinfected between uses.
 Walls. If walls are splashed with blood or organic debris during the surgical procedure, wash
those areas. Otherwise, walls are not considered contaminated and need not be washed between
surgical procedures before processing to the required level of safety for patient use.
Decontamination combines mechanical or manual cleaning and a physical or chemical
microbicidal process. Prerinsing, washing, rinsing, and disinfecting/sterilizing is done in the
processing department to render the instrumentation safe for handling by CS personnel. This
part of the process is referred to as thorough cleaning or return-to-use cleaning. After the formal
decontamination process the instrumentation are assembled into sets by the CS technician and
processed either by sterilization or disinfection (high level, intermediate level, or low level) for
use by the OR staff in patient care. Methods and procedures for decontamination and
disinfection vary according to the item to be processed and the recommended agent used in
processing. Personal protective equipment should be worn while using chemical disinfecting
agents.
Prerinsing/Presoaking
                                              289
The purpose of prerinsing or presoaking is to prevent blood and debris from drying on
instruments or to soften and remove dried blood and debris. The circulating nurse can prepare a
basin or plastic bin (with a cover) of enzymatic solution for the scrub person. For a short
immersion period, instruments may be presoaked in the following list of agents and solutions:
 A triple proteolytic enzymatic detergent. Proteolytic enzymes dissolve blood and debris, and
the detergent removes dissolved particulate from the surfaces of instruments, including
otherwise inaccessible areas such as lumens.
 An enzymatic agent diluted per manufacturer’s instructions.
Sodium hypochlorite (chlorine bleach) is corrosive; however, it is used as a presoak in suspected
or potential prion disease such as transmissible spongiform encephalopathy (TSE). Instruments
should not be soaked in any chlorine compound for more than 1 hour and should not be
autoclaved with chlorine solution because of the formation of toxic chlorine gas.
 Soaking in a phenolic, guanidine thiocyanate, or sodium hydroxide is an alternative, but
chlorine bleach is the most reliable in reducing the prion titer within 1 hour. These chemicals
are extremely corrosive and are not appropriate for use on endoscopes. Prerinsing or presoaking
instruments with enzymatic solution in the OR can make further processing more efficient.
Instruments should not be cleaned in scrub sinks or utility sinks in the substerile room.
Instruments in an enzymatic soak solution should be transported to the processing department
in a covered container.
Manual Cleaning If a washer-sterilizer or washer-decontaminator is not available, instruments
are washed by hand in the processing area. The purpose of manual cleaning is to remove residual
blood and debris before terminal sterilization or high-level disinfection. Delicate and sharp
instruments should be handled separately. Microsurgical and ophthalmic instruments should be
cleaned and dried by hand; they are not put in a washer-sterilizer. Because moisture is conducive
to corrosion, these instruments should not remain wet for long periods. Complex instruments
require complete disassembly before cleaning. Other instruments require special care. For
example, the outside surfaces of powered instruments must be cleaned, but these instruments
cannot be immersed in liquid. Some powered equipment requires lubrication as part of the
cleaning process. Personnel in the processing area wear PPE such as caps, gloves, waterproof
aprons, and face shields to prevent accidental spray from contaminated body fluids and chemical
cleaning solutions. The following steps should be observed when cleaning instruments
manually:
 Fill the washing sink with clean, warm water to which a noncorrosive, neutral pH, low-sudsing,
free-rinsing detergent has been added.
 Detergent should be compatible with the local water supply. The mineral content of water varies
from one region to another; a water softener may be used in the system routinely to minimize
mineral deposits. Regardless of the water content, the detergent should be anionic or nonionic
and have a pH as close to neutral as possible. An alkaline detergent (pH more than 8.5) can stain
instruments; an acidic detergent (pH less than 6) can corrode or pit them.
 Proteolytic enzymatic detergents dissolve blood and protein and remove dissolved debris from
crevices. These detergents are effective in a wide range of water qualities.
                                             290
 Liquid detergents are preferable because they disperse more completely than do solids. Dilute
the concentration before contact with instruments to avoid corrosion and staining. Do not pour
liquid or put solid detergents directly on instruments.
 Wash instruments carefully to guard against splashing and creating aerosols.
  a) Use a soft brush to clean serrations and box locks. A soft bristle toothbrush may be used
      to clean ophthalmic, microsurgical, and other delicate instruments. Keep instruments
      totally submerged while brushing to minimize aerosolizing microorganisms and
      chemicals.
  b) Use a soft cloth to wipe surfaces. A non-fibrous cellulose sponge will prevent damage to
      delicate tips.
  c) Remove bone, tissue, and other debris from cutting instruments.
  d) Never scrub surfaces with abrasive agents such as steel wool, wire brushes, scouring
      pads, or powders. These agents will scratch and may remove the protective finish on
      metal, thus increasing the likelihood of corrosion. The finish on stainless steel
      instruments protects the base metal from oxidation.
 3. Rinse instruments thoroughly in distilled or deionized water at the temperature
recommended by the manufacturer. Some enzymes can be inactivated by extreme temperatures.
The water should not exceed 140° F (60° C) to prevent burns of the skin. Inadequate rinsing can
leave a surface residue that can stain instruments.
 4. Load instruments into the appropriate trays for terminal sterilization or containers for high-
level disinfection. a. Put instruments back into sterilization racks or replace the protective guards
as appropriate. b. Arrange instruments that can be steam-sterilized in sterilizer trays for the
washer-sterilizer or washer-decontaminator. The unwrapped tray is terminally steam-sterilized
to make it safe for handling.
Perioperative Documentation
Specific care given in the perioperative environment should be documented on the patient’s
chart. Most facilities use a preprinted form with a standardized plan of care. Space is provided
to add individualized patient needs and to document additional interventions. Data included in
the record come from several patient care areas. A comprehensive checklist is included with the
chart to assist the circulating nurse to determine whether all of the data
Incident Report When an accident or unusual incident occurs involving a patient, employee, or
property in the facility, the factual details should be reported to the nurse manager and
documented according to institutional policy.
Preliminary Preparations Preliminary preparations of the OR are completed by the circulating
nurse and scrub person before each patient enters the OR. Assistance is provided by
environmental service personnel. It is a cooperative effort. Clean, organized surroundings are
part of total patient care. A visual inspection of the room and its contents should be performed
by the team before bringing in supplies for a case. Keep in mind that the human eye cannot see
microscopic contamination. The environmental sanitation activities described in this chapter are
for the benefit of the patient’s protection in the spirit of surgical conscience and should not be

                                               291
taken for granted as an unnecessary inconvenience for the staff. Preparation for the start of the
day requires making sure the room is as clean as it can be.
 Basic room contents should include the OR bed, anesthesia machine and supplies,
electrosurgical unit (ESU), instrument table, preparation (prep) table, Mayo stand, suction
apparatus, receptacles for biohazard and regular trash, and a linen hamper for reusable woven
fabrics
Other tables and equipment are added as needed. Anything brought into the room for the
procedure must be wiped down with an approved sporicidal disinfectant before put into use by
the team.
Last offices services in Operation Theatre
The last offices, or laying out, is the procedures performed, usually by a nurse, to the body of a
dead person shortly after death has been confirmed. They can vary between hospitals and
between cultures.
•To prepare the deceased for the mortuary (a funeral home or morgue), respecting their cultural
beliefs
•To comply with legislation, in particular where the death of a patient requires the involvement
of a Procurator Fiscal aka. Coroner
•To minimize any risk of cross-infection to relative, health care worker or persons who may
need to handle the deceased
Procedure
Often the body of the deceased is left for up to an hour as a mark of respect. The procedure then
typically includes the following steps, though they can vary according to an institution's
preferred practices:
•Removal of jewellery unless requested otherwise by the deceased's family. If left on it must be
documented in the patient's property list.
•Wounds, including pressure sores, should be covered with a waterproof dressing. Tube
insertion points should be padded with gauze and tape to avoid purging.
•The patient is laid on his/her back with arms by their side (unless religious customs demand
otherwise). Eyelids are closed.
•The jaw is often supported with a pillow or cervical collar.
•Dentures should be left in place, unless inappropriate.
•The bladder is drained by applying pressure on the lower abdomen. Orifices are blocked only
if leakage of body fluid is evident.
•The body is then washed and dried, the mouth cleaned and the face shaved.
•An identification bracelet is put on the ankle detailing: the name of the patient; date of birth;
date and time of death; name of ward (if patient died in hospital); patient identification number.
•The body is dressed in a simple garment or wrapped in a shroud. An identification label
duplicating the above information is pinned to the wrap or shroud.
•A stretcher draw sheet is placed under the body to enable removal to a trolley for transportation
to the morgue. These trolleys may often be disguised to resemble laundry carts if transportation
has to pass through areas where members of the public may be present.
                                              292
  Self-Assessment
   A. Short response Questions
1. What are the classes of wastes generated in Operation theatre
2. How would you dispose wastes generated in operation theatre using color codes bin with bin
   liners
3. Counting is essential in accountability of used materials in operating room
4. Name three drugs used as reversal agents in operating theatre
5. What is an incident report
6. Which position would you place a patient after the following surgeries
      a) Laparotomy
      b) Tonsillectomy
      c) Transthoracic surgery
  Practical task
1. Visit a skills laboratory and practice the following tasks
      a) Provide last office care to the mannequin provided
      b) Practice lifting unconscious patients from the operating table to the stretcher/from the
          stretcher to the PACU bed



  Tools, Equipment, Supplies and Materials
  Table 3 showing list of supplies and materials
        Supplies                                     Materials
           Gowns                                        Safety boxes
           Gloves                                       Waste bins
           Masks                                        Cleaning materials
           Boots                                        Water
           Scrubs                                       Soap/sanitizers
           Mannequin                                    Bed


  References


1. Berry & Kohn’s (2017) Operating room techniques, 13th edition, Elsevier publishers, Canada.
2. Brunner & Suddath (2010) Medical surgical Nursing, 12th edition, Seattle Saunders, USA
3. Dr. Masoud Sirat Nir (2016) Medical terminology student nurse in operating theatres



                                               293
Learning Outcome 4: Evaluate Perioperation Theatre clinical services
Introduction to the learning outcome
This unit describes the competencies required to provide theatre clinical services. It involves
Peri-Operative monitoring of patients and reporting patient’s condition.
  1. Patient’s condition is checked & recorded according to procedure performed and
     Standard Operation Procedures
  2. Condition of the patient is reported to appropriate personnel according to observed
     behavior
1.2.4 Information Sheet
Definition of terms
Parameters -a numerical or other measurable factor forming one of a set that defines a system
or sets the conditions of its operation.

                                            294
Content/methodology/process
Monitoring the Patient
The standard of care indicates that a registered nurse is responsible for monitoring the cardiac
and respiratory status of a patient receiving local anesthetic, with or without intravenous (IV)
conscious sedation, if an anesthesia provider is not present. The nurse is expected to interpret
the monitoring equipment, assess the patient, and initiate interventions promptly if the patient
has an untoward reaction. Policies and procedures are delineated by each facility for care of the
patient receiving local anesthetic. The nurse who is monitoring the patient should not be
assigned circulating duties that would distract attention from the patient.
Monitoring implies keeping track of vital functions. During extensive surgery with the patient
under anesthesia, the body is subjected to physiologic stress. Bleeding, tissue trauma, potent
drugs, large extravascular fluid shifts, multiple transfusions, and a surgical position that may
inhibit breathing and circulation all contribute to altered physiology. These factors can induce
significant cardiopulmonary dysfunction. Patients under local anesthesia are frequently
monitored with electrocardiographs (ECG).
Figure            4:           Diagram              showing             ECG            segments




Figure 5: A patient monitor showing an ECG wave




                                             295
If the patient has a known cardiac condition, such as atrial fibrillation (AF), the atrial
dysrhythmia is felt by the patient and demonstrated on the ECG machine. If the patient has had
atrial ablation treatments, an AF rhythm may be measured by the ECG monitor and not felt by
the patient. It is important to use subjective and objective measures to evaluate the patient’s
condition. Evaluation of the patient’s responses to surgical stressors includes observation,
auscultation, and palpation. The assessment is enhanced with the use of electronic or mechanical
devices that reveal physiologic trends and subtle changes and indicate responses to therapy.
Most of this equipment is expensive and is incorporated into the anesthesia machine. Compact
precise devices with miniaturized circuitry, better visibility, and easier maintenance are
incorporated into portable models that allow for continued monitoring after the patient leaves
the OR. Computers improve and expedite analysis of data. They are sophisticated data collection
and management tools that assist in physiologic assessment, diagnosis, and therapy. Clinical
computers vary from single-function devices to complex, multifunction, real-time systems that
acquire, store, and display data; organize information; display trends; and perform calculations.
Personnel who use electronic and computerized monitoring equipment must understand its use
and function, be experienced in its interpretation, and be able to determine equipment
malfunction easily. Instrumentation should augment, not replace, careful observation of the
patient. Monitoring equipment can be inaccurate. Information from monitors should be
compared with physical assessment data. Perioperative nurses involved with patient monitoring
should remain current in the knowledge of physical assessment and the use of the equipment.
Periodic competency testing should be performed. Written policies, procedures, and guidelines
should be available for reference. The spectrum of monitoring devices is broad. It ranges from
                                             296
noninvasive to invasive. Noninvasive monitors do not penetrate the body or a body orifice.
Conversely, invasive monitors penetrate skin or mucosa, or they enter a body cavity. Some
parameters can be measured with both noninvasive and invasive methods. Perioperative nursing
responsibilities may include assisting with sophisticated hemodynamic monitoring to evaluate
the interrelationship of blood pressure, blood flow, vascular volumes, and physical properties of
blood, heart rate, and ventricular function. Detection of early changes in hemodynamics allows
prompt action to maintain cardiac function and adequate cardiac output. Monitoring facilitates
rapid, accurate determination of decreased perfusion. It reflects immediate response to
therapeutic measures and stress.
Physiologic Parameters Monitored Noninvasive methods can be used to monitor some
cardiopulmonary and neural functions and to determine body temperature and urinary output.
Both noninvasive and invasive techniques are used for monitoring hemodynamic parameters to
show minute-to-minute changes in physiologic variables. Normal ranges of hemodynamic
parameters are given in electrocardiogram.
Every heartbeat depends on the electrical process of polarization. Muscles in the heart wall are
alternately stimulated and relaxed. An ECG is a recording of electrical forces produced by the
heart and translated as waveforms .It shows changes in rhythm, rate, and conduction, such as
dysrhythmias, appearance of premature beats, and block of impulses. An ECG does not provide
an index of cardiac output (CO). Cardiac monitoring has become standard procedure in the OR
and post anesthesia care unit (PACU). Cardiac monitoring systems generally consist of a
monitor screen; a cathode ray oscilloscope, on which the ECG is continuously visualized; and a
printout system, which transcribes the rhythm strip to paper to permit comparison of tracings
and provide a permanent record.
Arterial Blood Pressure
Blood pressure (BP) signifies the pressure exerted against vessel walls to force blood through
the circulation. Evaluation of BP during anesthesia requires consideration of blood volume, CO,
and the state of the sympathetic tone of the vessels. Tissue perfusion is dependent on these
factors. Arterial BP is used to assess hemodynamic and respiratory status during every surgical
procedure, with very few exceptions. The BP measures contraction of the heart (systolic
pressure) and relaxation of the heart between contractions (diastolic pressure). Blood is forced
through the arteries between contractions. Pressure is higher during systole and lower during
diastole. Many factors can cause BP to vary. It is measured in millimeters of mercury (mm Hg).
Normal range is 90 to 130 mm Hg systolic and 60 to 85 mm Hg diastolic. The arm used for

                                             297
measurements should be opposite the one cannulated for IV fluid therapy or invasive monitoring
and should be protected from contact with team members standing beside the OR bed. BP
readings can be obtained using indirect or direct methods, either intermittently or continuously.
Sphygmomanometer. A pneumatic cuff is wrapped around the circumference of the upper arm.
When the cuff is inflated, measurements are obtained on the sphygmomanometer as the cuff
deflates. Through a stethoscope placed over the brachial artery distal to the cuff, the systolic
pressure is heard when blood begins to flow through the artery. The diastolic pressure is noted
by a change in sound. This is an indirect noninvasive method for intermittent monitoring of BP.
Doppler Ultrasound Flowmeter. With ultrasound, BP can be monitored automatically at preset
intervals. The Doppler ultrasound flowmeter monitor automatically inflates the cuff, takes a
reading, and deflates the cuff. It can be programmed to sound an alarm if systolic pressure
reaches a preset high or low level. The readings are more accurate than with sphygmomanometer
pressure cuff monitoring because the ultrasonic transducer amplifies blood flow sounds.
Automated noninvasive BP monitors function well in a noisy environment. However, they do
not provide continuous BP measurement or detect extremely low pressures. Frequent inflations
of the cuff can bruise the skin, especially of geriatric patients. Infrared Beams. Noninvasive
infrared beams (Finapres technique) may be used to indirectly monitor BP. A small cuff fits on
a finger. The beams from the cuff shine through tissue. They continuously measure arterial
pressure from one heartbeat to the next. Direct Arterial Pressure. From an invasive modality,
beatto-beat direct pressures are obtained through an artery, usually the radial or femoral, via an
indwelling catheter inserted percutaneously. A very slow drip of slightly heparinized sterile
saline solution keeps the catheter open. The fluid-filled tubing from the catheter is connected to
a mechanical electric transducer. The transducer is attached to an amplifier.
Blood Gases, Oxygenation, and pH Monitoring of tissue perfusion is indispensable in the
evaluation of pulmonary gas exchange and acid-base balance. Measurements are considered in
relation to other parameters, such as vital signs, venous pressure, and left atrial pressure. Oxygen
and carbon dioxide in blood exert their own partial pressures (P). Measurements are expressed
in millimeters of mercury or torr. They may be differentiated as arterial (Pa) or venous (Pv). The
gas being measured is identified. The partial pressure of oxygen is expressed as Po2, or
specifically in arterial blood as Pao2 and in venous blood as Pvo2. Oxygen saturation (So2) in
arterial blood (Sao2) is expressed in percentages. The partial pressure of carbon dioxide is
specified as Paco2 or Pvco2. Monitoring techniques can be either noninvasive or invasive. Pulse
Oximetry. A pulse oximeter measures arterial oxyhemoglobin saturation (Sao2). It provides a
reading within seconds by measuring the optical density of light passing through tissues. A
sensor probe is clipped on each side of a pulsating vascular bed. Fingers, toes, earlobes, and the
bridge of the nose are suitable sites. The patient’s skin should be clean and dry. An area with
fingernail polish should be avoided or the polish removed. Skin integrity under the sensor must
be intact.
Central Venous Pressure Because it accurately measures right atrial BP, which in turn images
right ventricular BP, central venous pressure (CVP) monitoring assesses function of the heart’s
right side. It measures the pressure under which blood returns to the right atrium and reflects
                                              298
pressure in the venous system as blood returns to the heart. In other words, CVP represents the
amount of venous return and filling pressure of the right ventricle. This information helps
determine the patient’s circulatory status. CVP monitoring also aids in the evaluation of blood
volume and the relationship between circulating blood volume and the pumping action of the
heart (i.e., adequacy of volume presented to the heart for pumping). Therefore CVP monitoring
is a useful guide in blood or fluid administration to avoid circulatory overload in patients with
limited cardiopulmonary reserve. Too great or too rapid replacement can cause pulmonary
edema. Generally, a low CVP indicates that additional fluid can be given safely. CVP
monitoring may be used during shock or hypotension to judge the adequacy of blood
replacement. However, CVP is not a measure of blood volume per se or of CO. Indications for
CVP monitoring include major surgical procedures in patients with preexisting cardiovascular
disease, in surgical procedures in which large-volume shifts are anticipated (e.g., open heart
surgery), in critically ill patients (e.g., massive trauma, malignant hyperthermia), in surgical
procedures in which venous air emboli are a risk (e.g., craniotomy in a sitting position), and in
rapid administration of blood or fluid. Although CVP monitoring provides valuable data for
assessment of the adequacy of vascular volume, it only indirectly reflects the function of the left
side of the heart. There is no direct relationship between right and left ventricular filling
pressures. Because of the dispensability (compliancy) of the pulmonary blood vessels, the lungs
can accept a marked increase in blood flow before significant congestion appears. Backup of
blood caused by impaired function of the left ventricle and a subsequent increase in pulmonary
vascular resistance (PVR) may occur before this increased pressure affects the right side of the
heart, as exhibited by CVP values. Thus, CVP does not correlate with left-sided heart
performance in patients with left ventricular dysfunction or pulmonary congestion. Central
Venous Cannulation. CVP may be monitored with a single-lumen or multilumen radiopaque
catheter. A double-lumen or triple-lumen Hickman or Broviac catheter is used most commonly.
The right atrial lumen of a Swan-Ganz pulmonary artery catheter also can be used to obtain CVP
readings. The lumens are labeled and color-coded on multilumen catheters. The catheter is
inserted, preferably percutaneously through a subclavian vein. A brachial, external or internal
jugular, or femoral vein may be used or, via cutdown, the antecubital vein. If patients are awake,
they are asked to bear down (Valsalva’s maneuver) as the vein is punctured. This increases
intrathoracic pressure and counteracts negative pressure from the vein, thus reducing the
possibility of air embolism. The catheter is threaded through the vein and advanced into the
superior vena cava or right atrium. This may be done by fluoroscopy, or a chest x-ray may be
taken to verify accurate placement of the catheter tip. The catheter may be attached to a
transducer and monitor. Pressure readings are expressed in millimeters of mercury. The catheter
can be attached to a fluid-filled manometer that measures pressure in centimeters of water (cm
H2O). To set up this line, the IV solution bag is connected to the tubing, the manometer is
inserted into the line by attaching it to the stopcock between the IV tubing and the extension
tubing, air is expelled from the line, the line is clamped, and the manometer is secured upright
to an IV pole. The hub of the catheter lumen is connected to the stopcock. Connections to the
three-way stopcock should be taped to prevent inadvertent disconnection and air leaks. Cyclic

                                              299
variations in intracaval venous pressure occur; pressure becomes negative during atrial filling
and respiratory inspiration. Sucking of air into the system during negative venous pressure can
result in an air embolus. Baseline measurement is taken as soon as the catheter is in place and
attached to the monitor. This is also a presumptive check for proper placement of the cannula
tip. Because expansion of the lungs increases intrathoracic pressure and deflation decreases it,
fluid in the manometer should fluctuate with each breath. To obtain a CVP reading on the
manometer, adjust the scale to zero level with the patient’s right atrium. The lumen of the
stopcock to the catheter is shut off, which allows the IV fluid to run into the manometer to the
desired level. The infusion is shut off, and the catheter is opened. After the reading is obtained,
the infusion lumen to the catheter is opened to keep the line open. Electronic transducer systems
provide continuous monitoring of venous pressure. Continuous monitoring supplies good
measurement of the right side of the heart and portrays the trend of heart function that is more
valuable than are isolated readings obtained with a manometer. CVP values may vary somewhat,
but normal readings range from 2 to 8 mm Hg, or 3 to 10 cm H2O.
 Cardiac Output
Cardiac output is measured using the thermodilution technique to determine liters of blood
pumped per minute by the left ventricle into the aorta. Normal resting value is 4 to 8 L/min. A
known amount of fluid at a known temperature is injected into a lumen of an arterial catheter,
and a temperature gradient at a point downstream is measured via a second lumen. Iced-cold or
room temperature physiologic saline solution or 5% dextrose in water (10 mL) generally is used.
Blood flow supplies the thermal dilution; for example, saline solution mixes with blood in the
superior vena cava or right atrium, depending on the catheter location, which reduces the
temperature of blood in the heart. The cooled blood flows past a transistorized intravascular
thermistor in the thermodilution catheter that detects changes in blood temperatures that are then
used to compute CO.
When the solution is injected via the proximal right atrial lumen of a pulmonary artery Swan-
Ganz catheter, a digital display of CO is seen within 4 to 5 seconds. CO reflects the mechanical
activity of the heart and represents total blood flow to all tissues and vascular shunts. It depends
on the heart rate, the contractile strength of the heart muscle (myocardial contractility), the
peripheral resistance of vessels, and venous return. Inotropic agents such as digitalis or
epinephrine increase contractility and CO, except in patients with loss of functioning ventricular
muscle (e.g., after myocardial infarction or an aneurysm of the left ventricle
In compromised hearts, this pressure is higher. A reduced CO results in decreased perfusion of
the capillary circulation. During hemorrhage, when circulating blood volume is reduced, the
resulting diminished venous return and preload lead to a lowered CO. Atrial fibrillation also can
modify the filling of the ventricles. Venous dilation contributes to pooling of blood, with
subsequent decreased venous return to the heart. Low CO states result from reduced preload, as
in hypovolemia, venous dilation, or cardiac tamponade; reduced contractility, as from anesthetic
drugs, ischemia, infarction, or cardiac decompensation; dysrhythmias; or increased afterload, as
in hypertension, pulmonary emboli, or an elevated or diminished heart rate.


                                              300
Total Blood Volume
 Blood volume is useful in determining the total amount of blood replacement necessary. An
accurate method of total blood volume (TBV) measurement involves measuring plasma and red
blood cell volumes separately and then adding the results together. For measurement of red
blood cell volume, cells are tagged with detectable, nontoxic, radioactive chromium,
subsequently injected intravenously, and counted after an appropriate mixing time. Or
radioactive iodinated human serum albumin, in standard-dose packages, can be injected, mixed,
and counted. Counting may be done rapidly using an electronic device. This technique may be
used in place of estimation of blood loss.
Respiratory Tidal Volume
The respiratory tidal volume (VT), the volume of air moved with each respiration and expiration,
may be measured with a respirometer placed on the expiratory limb of the anesthesia machine
or mechanical ventilator. Alarms may be incorporated to signal disconnection, failure to cycle,
and excessive pressure.
Body Temperature
The body continuously produces heat through metabolic activities and loses heat through
convection, evaporation, conduction, and radiation. The production of heat causes increased
oxygen consumption by the body’s cells. When the rate of heat production is equal to the rate
of loss, a heat balance of constant core body temperature is maintained. Core temperature is that
of the interior of the body as opposed to the body surface temperature. Normal core temperature
ranges from 98° F to 100° F (36.8° C-37.7° C). Under anesthesia, the average adult loses 0.9° F
to 2.7° F (0.5° C-1.5° C) of body temperature; the greatest loss occurs during the first hour,
through convection from exposure to the environment, through evaporation via respiration,
through conduction from contact with cool surfaces, and through radiation from tissues.
Intraoperative hypothermia, or core temperature less than 96° F (36° C), is a common
complication of surgery under general anesthesia, especially in pediatric and geriatric patients.
Some anesthetic agents inhibit heat production: halogenated agents cause vasodilation that
contributes to surface cooling and muscle relaxants prevent shivering, which is a
thermoregulatory protective reflex. Other factors can change core temperature.
Urinary Output
 Urinary output can be measured with an indwelling Foley catheter attached to a calibrated
collection bag. The sterile disposable collection system must be below the level of the bladder
to prevent distention and allow flow without reflux. Output is valuable in assessing effective
blood volume and fluid administration, except when a diuretic is given. Volume, electrolytes,
osmolarity, and pH are important. Any change in urine color can signal a change in the patient’s
condition. Brown urine can mean the presence of hemoglobin or myoglobin caused by
rhabdomyolysis in a hypermetabolic crisis, such as malignant hyperthermia. Frank blood or clots
may indicate an injury to the kidney, ureter, or bladder from iatrogenic cause or other trauma.
IV dye, such as methylene
Table 4: Showing the patient monitoring parameters with normal ranges


                                             301
 Parameter                        Abbreviation                      Normal Range For Adults

 Arterial oxygen content          CaO2                              17-20ml/dl
 Blood pressure                   BP                                Systolic 90-130mmHg
                                                                    Diastolic 60-85mmHg

 Cardiac output                   CO                                4-8l/min
 Central venous pressure          CVP                               2-8mmHg
 Glomerular filtration rate       GFR                               80-120mls/min
 Heart rate                       HR                                60-100 beats per minute
 Intracranial pressure            ICP                               0-15mmHg
 Oxygen       saturation    in    SaO2                              95-97%
 arterial blood
 Partial pressure of Oxygen       PaO2                              80-100mmHg
 in arterial blood
 Stroke volume                    SV                                60-130Mml/beat




Standards and Methods for Documentation of Patient Care
The standards for patient care documentation are established by the American Nurses
Association (ANA) and TJC. The standard of care requires that patient care documentation
reflect the application of the nursing process (assessment, nursing diagnosis, outcome
identification, planning, intervention, and evaluation) during the entire length of stay, according
to ANA and TJC.
The use of the Perioperative Nursing Data Set (PNDS) is the method of choice for perioperative
patient care documentation. The PNDS provides a standardized universal language for patient
care documentation and is used by many surgical computer information system manufacturers.
Charting Modalities Many ways of recording patient care information have been used over the
years. Changes in technology have created more methods of recording patient care; below is a
list of examples.
Narrative charting
Writing about significant events using third-person commentary, quotes, and standard
abbreviations. Entries are sequential, timed, dated, and signed.
 Block charting

                                              302
 Short commentary on activity that resembles narrative charting covering a longer period of
several hours or days. Entries are sequential, timed, dated, and signed. Some facilities use a
checklist format.
Focus charting
Specific documentation directed at a designated aspect of the patient’s needs, status, or health
considerations.
 Subjective-objective     charting     (subjective-objective     assessment     plan     [SOAP]).
Multidisciplinary approach to documenting care according to cues given by a patient with a
specific set of signs and symptoms. This approach uses direct quotes and assessment data.
Problem-oriented charting (problem-oriented medical record [POMR]). Approach using a
problem list as the working element from which care is planned. Working from the list, patient
priorities are investigated, diagnosed, treated, minimized, solved, or remain ongoing. As
problems are solved, they are stricken from the list.
 Computer-generated charting. Use of standardized care plans formulated in the computer and
modified for the individual patient. The computer time and date stamps the plan as it is printed
for the hard copy record. This form of charting requires the caregiver’s signature.
Computer information systems, check-off forms, and flow sheets. Commonly used as shortcuts
for record keeping. Unfortunately, it is easy to rely on the standardized data on these preprinted
records and inadvertently omit potentially important individualized information. Most
computerized patient records have secondary documentation fields to complete for
individualized data capture.

Computerized Documentation- Many facilities have been using computers for patient
admitting, billing, scheduling, and human resource information for several decades. Within the
past few years, patient data have been recorded and stored electronically at the patient care unit
level. Referred to as electronic health records or electronic medical records, the documentation
is transmitted electronically to multiple sites including the OR, surgeon’s offices, and patient
care areas. Only select personnel are permitted to access this information and must log on using
employee identification and passwords to enter the computer system.3 Passwords are changed
at routine intervals. Retrievable data recorded and accumulated in these electronic files include
patient care information, laboratory results, surgical reports, admission and discharge
summaries, and many highly sensitive details about a patient’s financial status. Many larger
multihospital systems, such as the Cleveland Clinic, have utilized the Internet to permit multiple
record access points for office based physicians, surgeons, and the patient. All authorized users
have access to reports and health data as soon as they are entered into the system. Nurses charged
with the responsibility of accessing and contributing to computerized patient data should be
aware that security and confidentiality must be protected. Failing to maintain the secrecy of
passwords and failing to log off after use are common problems identified with unauthorized
access. Some systems have a built-in log-off feature if the workstation is left idle for a prolonged
period. If this happens, the user has to reenter the system by logging back on. Perioperative
Documentation Specific care given in the perioperative environment should be documented on
                                              303
the patient’s chart. Most facilities use a preprinted form with a standardized plan of care. Space
is provided to add individualized patient needs and to document additional interventions. Data
included in the record come from several patient care areas. A comprehensive checklist is
included with the chart to assist the circulating nurse to determine whether all of the data
Patient Hand-Off or Handover
• A hand-off is defined as a linear transmission of information from one person to another.
 • The Joint Commission recommends a standardized hand-off in their National Patient Safety
Goals. It is called the Targeted Solutions Tool for Hand-off Communications.
 • AORN also has recommendations for transferring patient care information.
 • Standardized protocols are recommended because the hand-off or handover of patients to
another health care provider is reported as a high-risk time associated with sentinel events.
 • Every facility should establish a format for standardized hand-off protocols and policies.
Standardized protocols provide critical patient information necessary for safe patient transfer
and reduction in communication breakdown.
 • Many standardized models exist. An example of a standardized documentation format is
SBAR (Situation, Background, Assessment, and Recommendation).
 • Another popular documentation format is SHARED (Situation, History, Assessment, Request,
Evaluate, and Document).
 • Hand-off reporting improved when health care facilities established a format of standardized
hand-off protocols. These protocols are written, verbal, and electronic methods of
documentation and communication.
 • Hand-off communication improved when personnel were educated about the standardized
protocols and policies. Positive education methods include: role playing, competency training,
case studies, anticipated patient needs, and simulation.
 • Ways to improve hand-off include: reduce noise and distractions, take notes, use a checklist,
improve listening skills, use standard vocabulary, provide accurate documentation, document
person taking hand-off report, ask questions, and read back information to verify. CONS
 • Communication breakdown has been documented as the root cause of many sentinel events.
 • Problems and errors related to poor hand-off include: room noise, rushing, errors on record,
distractions, change of staff, lack of information, personnel physiologic problems, relationship
barriers, lack of experience, and number of personnel involved in the hand-off process.
 • More research is needed to identify an error-free transfer of information to improve patient
outcomes. The current standardization protocols still have breakdowns in communication
putting patients at risk for injury.

Self-assessment
 1. Define patient hand over?
 2. Post recovery, what aspects of urine monitoring can be used to monitor status of a patient
 3. What is the normal temperature range
 4. How does general anesthesia affect patient temperature
 5. What is cardiac output
                                              304
   6. What is the difference between systolic and diastolic pressure?
   7. When monitoring status of a patient, an electrocardiogram indicates the functioning of a
       patient, what are the normal ECG waves on an electrocardiogram?
   8. What type of documentation can be done in operating theatre?
  Practical tasks
   1. Visit a skills laboratory session and demonstrate how to take blood pressure using
       sphygmomanometer.
   2. Draw an ECG wave to illustrate a normal heart activity




References
   Aggarwal R, Arora S, Darzi A, et al.: Effectiveness of interventions to improve patient handover
  in surgery: A systematic review, Surgery: Official Journal of the Society of University Surgeons,
  Central Surgical Association, and the American Association of Endocrine Surgeons 158(1):85–
  95, 2015.
 Mohorek M, Webb T: Establishing a conceptual framework for handoffs using communication
  theory, Journal of Surgical Education 72(3):402– 409, 2015.
   AORN: Transfer of patient care information. Perioperative Standards and Recommended
  Practices, Denver, Co, 2015, AORN, Inc.




                                               305
306
